[OCPNODE-1639] Add ClusterImagePolicy, ImagePolicy to support signature verification (#1402)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/api-review/add-ImagePolicy-to-config.openshift.io-v1alpha1.md

superseded-by:
  - "/enhancements/our-past-effort.md"
---

# Add CRD ImagePolicy to config.openshift.io/v1alpha1

## Summary

This enhancement propose an ImagePolicy CRD to provide a way to set sigstore image signature verification configuration on Openshift.

## Motivation

### User Stories

As an OpenShift user, I want to verify the container images signed using sigstore
tools, so that I can utilize the increased security of my software supply chain.

### Goals

- The user can create an ImagePolicy instance specifying the images/repositories to be verified and their policy. The MCO will write the configuration for signature verification. Once this is done, CRI-O can verify the images/repositories.

- MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

- CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy by using the namespace from the sandbox config on the `PullImage` RPC.

### Non-Goals

> ImagePolicy CRD does not implements cosign with custom Fulcio and Rekor instance.

Reviewer: What does this mean? That only the upstream `sigstore.dev` servers are accepted?

That effectively turns `sigstore.dev` into a single centralized identity provider, and a centralized record of all image signatures. Why would that be acceptable in an enterprise deployment?

Reviewer 2: > What does this mean? That only the upstream sigstore.dev servers are accepted?

For the first iteration, yes. The option is to enable support for third party servers at some later feature stage.

@QiWang19 we may rephrase this sentence to make it a bit more clear.

Reviewer: I’d rather advocate for enabling support for other ones immediately. It’s just two more fields to carry  (`fulcio.caData` and `rekorPublicKeyData`), structurally completely the same as the already proposed `keyData`.

That’s a completely trivial cost to implement the feature (admittedly there might be a noticeable cost to _test_ that it works with a real deployment of private servers), and it would send a strong message that we do expect a federated ecosystem to develop, instead of nudging early adopters to coalesce around a single resource (and excluding those who won’t).

---

Another thing to consider is that the underlying `policy.json` _requires_ the Fulcio and Rekor keys to be provided, so if the user won’t provide them via this CR, the MCO must obtain them … somehow.

I’m sure that code can be written, and it’s probably not too much code, but it’s a critical responsibility to take on. (And MCO will have to choose between including hard-coded public keys directly in the codebase and the shipped binary, and between fetching the public keys from some `sigstore.dev` TUF servers, which doesn’t work at all for completely disconnected systems.)

So, it seems to me to be much easier, in the first iteration, to _require_ the user to provide the two keys, and have MCO just move the data around. That is certain to be possible, and it immediately and without any extra work supports both disconnected clusters and private server instances; at the cost a bit of extra work when deploying. _Later_ some more native support for `sigstore.dev` itself could be added, where the users wouldn’t have to provide private keys.

Starting with a version that is simpler to implement but requires some extra user effort (mitigated by a 5-line shell script that can be updated if the keys change) seems to me to be a reasonable choice for a technical preview, or a first version, of a feature.

OTOH I could imagine a hypothetical where the only imperative were to provide an immediate and low-deployment-effort feature to work with `sigstore.dev`, and disconnected/private situations were not a concern at all; I’d just be very surprised. Is that the case here?

Reviewer 2: > I’d rather advocate for enabling support for other ones immediately. It’s just two more fields to carry (fulcio.caData and rekorPublicKeyData), structurally completely the same as the already proposed keyData.

@QiWang19 we had a version where we included those fields, do we want to add them back?

Author: yes, I think we can add that back.

Author: I included the `fulcioCAData` and `rekorKeyData` in the structure.

Author: How should we update the field requirements?  If the `keyData` is set, we should require `oidcIssuer`, `subjectEmail`, `fulcioCAData` and `rekorKeyData` to be empty. If `keyData` is not set, we should require other values not to be empty?

Author: @mtrmac updated the API, could you take a look?

Reviewer: The validation as described above makes sense to me, except that `keyData`+`rekorKeyData` is a valid combination.

The implemented validation expressions seem to not match precisely.

---

(Just to be sure, warning again: I’m not currently familiar with the k8s API evolution techniques, I’ve approved problematic designs in the past, and my opinion in that respect should carry no weight.)

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for adding signature verification configurations in
cluster scope.

> 1. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file with `namespace: opesnhift-config`.

Reviewer 3: nit: `opesnhift-config` -> `openshift-config`

2. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy instance using `oc create -f imagepolicy.yaml`.
3. The cluster administrator can get the merged cluster scope policies from `status` of ImagePolicy instances. 
4. The cluster administrator can delete the signature verification configuration by deleting its ImagePolicy instances. 

**application administrator** is a human user responsible for
adding signature verification configurations for specific namespace.

> 1. The application administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file for namespace that is not `namespace: opesnhift-config`

Reviewer 3: same as above

5. The application administrator cannot override cluster scoped policies because they will treated with a higher priority.

### API Extensions

#### Type definitions

```go
type ImagePolicySpec struct {
	// image defines the list of images/repositories assigned to a policy.
	Images []ImageScope `json:"images"`
	// policy defines the verification policy
	Policy Policy `json:"policy"`
}

// ImageScope is the item of the images list.
// https://go.dev/play/p/FfL_3bpqSX5
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^\*(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+$|^((?:(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?/)?[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?)(?::([\w][\w.-]{0,127}))?(?:@([A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*(?:[-_+.][A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*)*[:][[:xdigit:]]{32,}))?$`
type ImageScope string

type Policy struct {
	// OIDCIssuer contains the expected OIDC issuer.
	// Requires SubjectEmail to be set and KeyData to be empty.
	// Example: "https://expected.OIDC.issuer/"

> 	OIDCIssuer string `json:"oidcIssuer,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Fulcio certificates can _only_ be accepted with a specified CA certificate. Using the system-wide database of hundreds of CAs does not work:
- the default list (hopefully) doesn’t include any Fulcio CA at all
- if the user has a private Fulcio CA, that CA should be only used for Fulcio OIDC certificates and not accepted for issuing any TLS certificates.
- any one of the the public CAs can, in principle, issue a certificate claiming some OIDCIssuer; they should not be trusted to behave nicely

> 	OIDCIssuer string `json:"oidcIssuer,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Similarly, acceptance of Fulcio certificates _requires_ use of Rekor (or, in the future, some other timestamp mechanism), and that only works when a Rekor public key is provided.

	// SubjectEmail holds the email address of the subject.
	// Example: "expected-signing-user@example.com"
	// Requires OIDCIssuer to be set and KeyData to be empty.
	SubjectEmail string `json:"subjectEmail,omitempty"`

	// KeyData contains inline base64 data of the public key.
	// Can be empty if the image got signed keyless.
	// Requires OIDCIssuer and SubjectEmail to be empty.
	KeyData string `json:"keyData,omitempty"`

	// SignedIdentity specifies what image identity the signature
	// claims about the image.
	SignedIdentity Identity `json:"signedIdentity,omitempty"`
}

type Identity struct {
	// Defaults to "matchRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicy IdentityMatchPolicy `json:"identityMatchPolicy,…"`
	DockerRepository    string              `json:"dockerRepository,omitempty"`
}

type IdentityMatchPolicy string

const (

> 	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepository = "matchRepository"

Reviewer: I don’t care too much about exposing all the `signedIdentity` options; but the default of `matchRepoDigestOrExact` should also be the default for OpenShift, and `remapIdentity` is much more convenient than `exactRepository`, so I think `remapIdentity` should either be supported out of the gate, or it should at least be clear how that is going to be added.

Author: hmm, the containers/image mentioned the cosign signature only contains the repository, does this mean the default should be `matchRepository` since only cosign is supported?

> cosign-created signatures only contain a repository, so only matchRepository and exactRepository can be used

Reviewer: I don’t think so; I’d much prefer for `cosign` to change. I.e. default to matching that includes tags, but allow OpenShift users to define a cosign-compatible policy with `matchRepository` / `exactRepository`.

Compare also https://github.com/containers/image/issues/1952 , as a start of the upstream effort to treat signed identities as a critical signature feature.

Author: Updated the comment to point out the default `matchRepoDigestOrExact` and support `remapIdentity`.

	IdentityMatchPolicyExactRepository = "exactRepository"
)

type ImagePolicyStatus struct {
	// PolicyJSON contains the whole policy applied to the namespace
	// which got written to disk. This includes cluster-wide policies
	// from the `openshift-config` namespace as well.
	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Update container runtime config controller to watch ImagePolicy

> MCO container runtime config controller ImagePolicy syncHandler updates the signature verification configurations:

Reviewer 3: this is going to be a separate sync flow right?

- retrieves all the ImagePolicy instances on the cluster.
- validates conflicting data from ImagePolicy instances.
- adds following configurations to a single machine config
  - merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined /path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json.  
  If no policy exists in a namespace, use the current default of:

    ```yaml
    { "default": [{ "type": "insecureAcceptAnything" }] }
    ```

    If a single policy exists, use the default:
    
    ```yaml
    { "default": [{"type": "reject"}] }
    ```

  - adds [/etc/containers/registries.d/*.yaml](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.d.5.md) to allow matching sigstore signatures, for example:

    ```yaml
    docker:
      my-registry/image:
        use-sigstore-attachments: true
    ```

    Alternatively, we can enable it node wide:

    ```yaml
    default-docker:
      use-sigstore-attachments: true
    ```
- merges cluster scoped with namespaced ImagePolicy as a json string and update `status` of each ImagePolicy.

> Once an ImagePolicy object gets created/updated, container runtime config controller will call the syncHandler.

Reviewer 3: An opportunity here is to make the sync do an overall sync of all ImagePolicy objects whenever this happens (as opposed to just the object being updated), to decrease the chances of something mis-syncing across namespaces, and to align it better for the MCO

Author: yes, the syncHandler would do the sync for all ImagePolicy objects, and the json string of the merged sigstore policies will be written to the `status` of all existing ImagePolicy objects.

Once an ImagePolicy object gets deleted, container runtime config controller will delete the machine config and run the syncHandler

#### Notes

ImagePolicy is defined as namespaced CRD. `namespace: openshift-config` is used for cluster policy.

### Risks and Mitigations

Risk: The cluster scoped and namespace policies overwrite

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.   

Reviewer 3: Could you elaborate on this point?

Author: The syncHandler in container runtime config controller will merge all the imagePolicy from opeshift-config namespace and other namespaces, it should error out if the sigsore policy for the same image scope has been configured under global(`openshift-config`) namespace and non global namspace.

Reviewer 4: > ... it should error out if the sigsore policy for the same image scope has been configured under global(1openshift-config1) namespace and non global namspace.

[The policy spec includes][1]:

> The policy requirements are represented as a JSON array of individual requirement objects.  For an image to be accepted, *all* of the requirements must be satisfied simultaneously.

So maybe we can just append entries when creating the policy being used to pull images for workloads in that namespace?  Or is this limited by the CRI, and today there is no way to say "I'm pulling this for `$NAMESPACE`, so use its policies"?  If we are limited to a single unified policy, doesn't this API allow for a denial-of-service conflict where a workload admin trying to configure namespace A sets a strict policy that breaks the ability to pull images into namespace B workloads?

[1]: https://github.com/containers/image/blame/8ad019310ff2ed8f99dea75b18998b415955bf8e/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md#L117-L119

---
title: add-ImagePolicy-to-config.openshift.io-v1alpha1
authors:
  - "@QiWang19"
reviewers: # Include a comment about what domain expertise a reviewer is expected to bring and what area of the enhancement you expect them to focus on. For example: - "@networkguru, for networking aspects, please look at IP bootstrapping aspect"
  - "@saschagrunert, for API design, implementation details and graduation criteria"
  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@yuqi-zhang"
  - "@mtrmac"
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - "@mrunalp"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - "@mrunalp"
creation-date: 2023-05-17

> last-updated: yyyy-mm-dd

Reviewer 4: nit: placeholder should be populated before the pull lands.

tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-1628
---

# Add CRD ImagePolicy to config.openshift.io/v1alpha1

## Summary

This enhancement propose an ImagePolicy CRD to provide a way to set sigstore image signature verification configuration on Openshift.

## Motivation

### User Stories

As an OpenShift user, I want to verify the container images signed using sigstore
tools, so that I can utilize the increased security of my software supply chain.

### Goals

- The user can create an ImagePolicy instance specifying the images/repositories to be verified and their policy. The MCO will write the configuration for signature verification. Once this is done, CRI-O can verify the images/repositories.

- MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

> - CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy by using the namespace from the sandbox config on the `PullImage` RPC.

Reviewer: ⚠️ 

AFAICS that doesn’t work; the Kubelet does not trigger a `PullImage` if it already exists (depending on `Container.ImagePullPolicy`). So one permissively-configured namespace can cause an image to be pulled, and a strictly-configured namespace will not see its policy enforced.

This might trigger a fairly extensive rethink … does CRI-O need to trigger a pull on every `CreateContainer`? Somehow caching that outcome per namespace?

Reviewer 2: @mtrmac would it be fine to call [`signature.IsRunningImageAllowed()`](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/8ad019310ff2ed8f99dea75b18998b415955bf8e/signature/policy_eval.go#L256-L293) on every container creation and caching the results?

Reviewer: That directly works _if_ the image uses a digest reference. For tag references, we need to worry about pull getting image A, and container creation checking signatures of image B. I think it’s very likely code to do that safely can be written with the existing libraries, still I think prototyping that might be valuable to avoid late-stage surprises.

And MCO + CRI-O might need to cooperate about invalidating that cache if `policy.json` changes don’t always involve a reboot.

Reviewer 2: Working towards a solution in https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/7046

Reviewer 5: ISTM that this thread is really similar to https://github.com/containers/skopeo/issues/1829 right?

Reviewer: @cgwalters I don’t see much of a connection. Here we are not worried about not having a policy, but about code paths not enforcing it (and possibly about just not having enough data to enforce it — @saschagrunert has fixed that part).

Reviewer 5: My thought on the relation here was that I'd still like to consider persisting the result of the policy evaluation, because it makes it dramatically easier to introspect and verify.
We do this in ostree.

(Now yes, it introduces hysteresis because it raises the question of "how does it work if the policy changes", but I think caching e.g. the sha256 digest of the policy that was used at pull time would help in terms of verifying "did the policy change since the image was last pulled" etc.)

> ### Non-Goals

Reviewer 4: Some of the entries from *Workflow Description* can be bubbled up here as explicit non-goals.  For example:

* Do not grant the application administrator the ability to weaken cluster-scoped policies, to avoid expanding the set of administrators capable of increasing cluster exposure to vulnerable images.
* Do not grant the application administrator  the ability to tighten cluster-scoped policies.  This could be useful in the future, but we are deferring it to limit the amount of work needed for an initial implementation.
* Etc., etc.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

> **cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for adding signature verification configurations in

Reviewer 4: nit: I'm not clear on what "human" adds here.  We expect these same APIs to be available to robotic administrators and their assistants as well, right?

4. The cluster administrator can delete the signature verification configuration by deleting its ImagePolicy instances. 

**application administrator** is a human user responsible for
adding signature verification configurations for specific namespace.

1. The application administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file for namespace that is not `namespace: openshift-config`
2. The application administrator creates ImagePolicy instance using `oc create -f imagepolicy.yaml`.
3. The application administrator can get the merged cluster policy and policy for certain namespace from `status` of ImagePolicy instances. 
4. The application administrator can delete the signature verification configuration by deleting its ImagePolicy instances.
5. The application administrator cannot override cluster scoped policies because they will treated with a higher priority.

### API Extensions

#### Type definitions

```go
type ImagePolicySpec struct {
	// image defines the list of images/repositories assigned to a policy.
	Images []ImageScope `json:"images"`
	// policy defines the verification policy
	Policy Policy `json:"policy"`
}

// ImageScope is the item of the images list.

> // https://go.dev/play/p/FfL_3bpqSX5

Reviewer 4: What are the Go Playground's retention policies?  It might be safer to inline your generation script in the commit message, instead of, or in addition to, including this link?

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^\*(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+$|^((?:(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?/)?[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?)(?::([\w][\w.-]{0,127}))?(?:@([A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*(?:[-_+.][A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*)*[:][[:xdigit:]]{32,}))?$`

> type ImageScope string

Author: updated. Now the `busybox` is not valid. and `hostname:port` is valid
I adjusted the `domain`, `namePat` from the c/image
https://go.dev/play/p/E_4j1OLG7fG

> type ImageScope string

Reviewer: - AFAICS that _requires_ a tag or digest; most users would want to set a scope at a namespace, or at most a repo.
- Does that allow `localhost` as a scope? I can’t see that it does.

Testing using:
```go
func main() {
	r := re(anchoredImageRegexp)
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("localhost/foo/bar"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("busybox"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("*.example.com"))
}
```

---

A minor detail: `referencePat` includes `namePat`, but _both_ allow the `repeated(literal(`/`), nameComponent)` pattern. That should not be necessary AFAICS, and the resulting pattern could end up simpler.

> type ImageScope string

Reviewer: (Specifically on `"localhost"` as a scope, I… wouldn’t really claim that it is essential to allow that :) A known bug on that one name might be fine. OTOH specifically allowing that name by adding a special case to the regexp seems easy enough…

More important are the repo-only scopes; I’m either looking at the wrong thing entirely, or that could benefit from a bit more testing before we set the validation regexp in stone.)

> type ImageScope string

Author: > * Does that allow `localhost` as a scope? I can’t see that it does.

I misunderstood that the "localhost" must be followed with port.

I tested this one: https://go.dev/play/p/tEBFX65IcEI
```go
func main() {
	fmt.Println(anchoredImageRegexp)
	r := re(anchoredImageRegexp)
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("localhost/foo/bar"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("example.com/foo/bar"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("example.com/foo/bar:latest"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("example.com/namespace/namespace@sha256:b7e686e30346e9ace664fa09c0275262f8b9a443ed56d22165a0e201f6488c13"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("*.example.com"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("localhost:1234/namespace/namespace"))

	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("*.example.com/test"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("busybox"))
	fmt.Printf("%#v\n", r.MatchString("example:1234/namespace/namespace"))
}

^\*(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+$|^((((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+(?::[0-9]+)?)|(localhost(?::[0-9]+)?))(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?)(?::([\w][\w.-]{0,127}))?(?:@([A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*(?:[-_+.][A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*)*[:][[:xdigit:]]{32,}))?$
true
true
true
true
true
true
false
false
false
```

Maybe we can move the review for this regex to openshift/api after the enhancement is done.  openshift/api has `techpreview.imagepolicy.testsuite.yaml` that allows us to add tests.

> type ImageScope string

Reviewer: I’m not sure which parts of the enhancement document need to be 100% finalized.

If we _can_ do that later, doing it in a repo with better tooling sounds great.

type Policy struct {
	// oidcIssuer contains the expected OIDC issuer.
	// Example: "https://expected.OIDC.issuer/"
	// Required if fulcioCAData is set.
	// subjectEmail must be set and keyData must be empty if oidcIssuer is set
	// +optional
	OIDCIssuer string `json:"oidcIssuer,omitempty"`

	// subjectEmail holds the email address of the subject.
	// Example: "expected-signing-user@example.com"
	// Required if fulcioCAData is set.
	// oidcIssuer must be set and keyData must be empty if subjectEmail is set.
	// +optional

> 	SubjectEmail string `json:"subjectEmail,omitempty"`

Author: ```go
// Policy defines the verification policy for the images in the images list.
type Policy struct {
	// rootOfTrust specifies the verification policy based on either the public key, or the Fulcio certificate and the Rekor public key.
	// requires fulcioOnlyAuth to be empty if rootOfTrust is set.
	RootOfTrust RootOfTrust `json:"rootOfTrust,omitempty"`

	// fulcioOnlyAuth specifies the verification policy based on the Fulcio certificate.
	// requires rootOfTrust to be empty if fulcioOnlyAuth is set.
	FulcioOnlyAuth FulcioAuth `json:"fulcioOnlyAuth,omitempty"`

	// signedIdentity specifies what image identity the signature.
	// claims about the image.
	// +optional
	SignedIdentity Identity `json:"signedIdentity,omitempty"`
}

type RootOfTrust struct {
	// keyData contains inline base64 data of the public key.
	// keyData can be empty if the image got signed keyless.
	// Requires oidcIssuer, subjectEmail, and fulcioCAData to be empty if keyData is set.
	// +optional
	KeyData string `json:"keyData,omitempty"`

	// fulcioAuth specifies the fulcio authentication configuration.
	FulcioAuth FulcioAuth `json:"fulcioAuth,omitempty"`

	// rekorKeyData contains inline base64 data of the rekor public key.
	// Required if fulcioAuth.fulcioCAData is set.
	// +optional
	RekorKeyData RekorKeyData `json:"rekorKeyData,omitempty"`
}

type FulcioAuth struct {
	// oidcIssuer contains the expected OIDC issuer.
	// Example: "https://expected.OIDC.issuer/"
	// Required if fulcioCAData is set.
	// subjectEmail must be set and keyData must be empty if oidcIssuer is set
	// +optional
	OIDCIssuer string `json:"oidcIssuer,omitempty"`

	// signedEmail holds the email address the the certificate is issued for.
	// Example: "expected-signing-user@example.com"
	// Required if fulcioCAData is set.
	// oidcIssuer must be set and keyData must be empty if subjectEmail is set.
	// +optional
	SignedEmail string `json:"signedEmail,omitempty"`

	// fulcioCAData contains inline base64 data for the fulcio CA certificate.
	// +optional
	FulcioCAData string `json:"fulcioCAData,omitempty"`
}
```

> 	SubjectEmail string `json:"subjectEmail,omitempty"`

Author: @mtrmac Did the above struct get your suggestion right? The image can be verified by one of either `rootOfTrust` or `fulcioOnlyAuth`?

> 	SubjectEmail string `json:"subjectEmail,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Not quite. The way I think of “root of trust”, it’s either KeyData(+RekorKeyData) or FulcioCAData+RekorKeyData; (or, in some future, maybe FulcioCAData+TimestampAuthorityCertificateData; that isn’t supported in c/image now). It’s where trust of any other data comes from.

I.e. OIDCIssuer+SignedEmail are not a part of the “root of trust”, they are restrictions to be applied to a Fulcio certificate once the certificate is already trusted to be issued by Fulcio, based on the “root of trust” configuration. Or, another way to say it, they turn a known-_valid_ Fulcio certificate (Fulcio did sign it) into an _acceptable_ Fulcio certificate (Fulcio claims it’s the user we trust).

That’s all mostly pedantic, apart from the motivation above, that the “restrictions” might be expanded with extra and/or alternative features over time, and therefore might need a separate struct and a separate API design.

Conceptually it’s (using Swift to express union types precisely)
```swift
struct SignatureAcceptanceRule {
   let publicKeySourceAndAcceptance: enum {
   case manualPublicKey(trustedPublicKeyData: Data, rekorPublicKey: Data?)
   case fulcioAndRekor(fulcioCAData: Data, rekorPublicKey: Data, fulcioSubject: FulcioSubjectRules)
   }
   let signedIdentity: SignedIdentityRule
}

enum FulcioSubjectRules {
   case oidcEmailIdentity(oidcIsuer: String, signedEmail: String)
   // may add significantly more other cases over time
}
```

i.e. the “restrictions” = `FulcioSubjectRules` only exist for Fulcio-issued certificates; a Rekor key is mandatory with Fulcio, optional with manually-provided public key.

---

So one option would be to model it exactly like the above in the API, with discriminators for the alternatives in SignatureAcceptanceRule / FulcioSubjectRules .

What I was thinking was, instead
```go
type Policy struct {
	RootOfTrust PolicyRootOfTrust // must always exist; or embed it directly inside
	FulcioSubject PolicyFulcioSubject // mandatory if RootOfTrust includes a Fulcio CA
	SignedIdentity PolicyIdentity // mandatory
}

type PolicyRootOfTrust struct {
	// Exactly one of the two must be set
	KeyData string
	FulcioCAData string 

	RekorKeyData string // Mandatory if FulcioCAData is set, optional with KeyData
}

type PolicyFulcioSubject struct {
	// SOMEHOW prepare for adding more fields, or for not using the fields below

	// Currently both must be set
	OIDCIssuer string
	SignedEmail string
}
```

which does not model as precisely the required/optional/alternative relationships, forcing those to be maintained in code, but might be more ergonomic due to less duplication.

I _really_ am not an authority on K8s API design.

> 	SubjectEmail string `json:"subjectEmail,omitempty"`

Author: Also updated the API in the PR  https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1457, @mtrmac could you take a look?

> 	SubjectEmail string `json:"subjectEmail,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Thanks! Data structures LGTM, minor comments on validation rules. (I had no idea they could be that expressive.)

	// rekorKeyData contains inline base64 data of the rekor public key.
	// Required if fulcioCAData is set.
	// +optional
	RekorKeyData string `json:"rekorKeyData,omitempty"`

	// signedIdentity specifies what image identity the signature.
	// claims about the image.
	// +optional
	SignedIdentity Identity `json:"signedIdentity,omitempty"`
}

type Identity struct {
	// Defaults to "MatchRepoDigestOrExact"
	IdentityMatchPolicy IdentityMatchPolicy `json:"identityMatchPolicy,…"`
	DockerRepository    string              `json:"dockerRepository,omitempty"`
	Prefix string `json:"prefix,omitempty"`
	SignedPrefix string `json:"signedPrefix,omitempty"`
}

type IdentityMatchPolicy string

const (
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepoDigestOrExact = "MatchRepoDigestOrExact"
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepository        = "MatchRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyExactRepository        = "ExactRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyRemapIdentity          = "RemapIdentity"
)

type ImagePolicyStatus struct {
	// PolicyJSON contains the whole policy applied to the namespace
	// which got written to disk. This includes cluster-wide policies
	// from the `openshift-config` namespace as well.

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: The main impact of an ImagePolicy is a `/path/to/policies/<NAMESPACE>.json` with this JSON content.  But `use-sigstore-attachments` entries will also be written to `/etc/containers/registries.d/*.yaml`.  Should that information be represented in `status`?  Or should folks interested in that content be checking the rendered MachineConfig `spec` to see how it's working?

Author: `/etc/containers/registries.d/*.yaml` turns on the read of sigstore signatures. It seems the content will not be frequently used like the global policy `policyJson` unless for debugging.
We don't  have to have separate yaml file for each  namespace. Folks can check the mahcineconfig or check the single yaml file like `/etc/containers/registries.d/sigstore.yaml`

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Author: Merged policy will be written to all of `ImagePolicy` objects. MCO reads all the `ImagePolicy` objects and writes the policies to a machine config.

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Reviewer: What happens if the CRs applying to a single namespace contain not-exactly-identical `ImagePolicy.Status.PolicyJSON` values? At least in the naive implementation, and IIRC in the current MCO code organization, the controller that turns `ImagePolicySpec` into `ImagePolicyStatus`, and the controller than turns `ImagePolicyStatus` into `MachineConfig`, run concurrently without coordination, so it’s not obvious to me that this can be ruled out.

Hopefully that should be transient state, but still… if the `PolicyJSON` field can not be trusted and admins debugging need to investigate `MachineConfig` directly, is there a value in all those data copies?

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: I share the concerns about copying this data many times. The MCO should have a single source of truth for this

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Author: I think that the PolicyJSON field will be in its intended state once the CRs are settled. 
 we can also consider the possibility of removing this field and guiding administrators to check `<namespace>.json`, which contains both the cluster-level override and namespace-specific policies within the `99-<pool>-imagepolicy machine-config`.
@saschagrunert wdyt?

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Author: @yuqi-zhang 
Should we guide users to access the machine configuration in order to retrieve the configuration? Based on the current design, I don't know whether there is another alternative location where the consolidated policy can be centrally stored.

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: @QiWang19 sounds good to me! We can add the field later on if required.

> 	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: > Should we guide users to access the machine configuration in order to retrieve the configuration? Based on the current design, I don't know whether there is another alternative location where the consolidated policy can be centrally stored.

As I understand based on the discussion, what is being proposed is either:
1. the MCC merges all policies into the 99-pool-imagepolicy config, which acts as the only source of truth for the merged policy, or
2. something merging policies first into a (configmap?) and then the MCO just renders based on the configmap and doesn't actually understand policy merging logic (but who else would do this)?

I think either one should work in theory, I don't have a strong feeling, assuming both implementations use the MCO as it's rendering path

	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Update container runtime config controller to watch ImagePolicy

MCO container runtime config controller ImagePolicy syncHandler updates the signature verification configurations:
- retrieves all the ImagePolicy instances on the cluster.

> - validates conflicting data from ImagePolicy instances.

Reviewer: Resolved by the documented merge rules.

- adds following configurations to a single machine config

>   - merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined /path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json.  

Author: I apologize for not making it clear. 
We don't create `policy.json` if there's no per-namespace `ImagePolicy`. I understand it as 
- the per-namespace `ImagePolicy` instances will be used to create `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json` only for this namespace. 
- If it does not have any per-namespace ImagePolicy, we don't create `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`, crio will use the cluster-wide policy.json as fallback. That cluster-wide policy.json comes from the ImagePolicy CR with `openshift-config` namespace.

@saschagrunert Am I understanding this correctly?

>   - merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined /path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json.  

Reviewer 2: @QiWang19 yes and if there is no cluster-wide policy.json available in the `openshift-config` namespace, then we use the default policy configured for CRI-O.

>   - merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined /path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json.  

Reviewer: Thanks, that makes the scaling issues less relevant (but still potentially binding in the worst case).

But also note the interaction with https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1223505513 .

Does the `"default"` policy depend on presence of a per-namespace `ImagePolicy` or not? The text, as it is now, says that presence of per-namespace `ImagePolicy` is how this gets decided.

OTOH https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1242862215 says that the default for each namespace is inherited from the cluster-wide default (and it’s not clear to me how that one is set).

>   - merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined /path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json.  

Author: cluster-wide `default` should inherit from the Image CR. The allowedRegistries will update the default to `reject`.

  If no policy exists in a namespace, use the current default of:

    ```yaml
    { "default": [{ "type": "insecureAcceptAnything" }] }
    ```

    If a single policy exists, use the default:
    
    ```yaml
    { "default": [{"type": "reject"}] }

>     ```

Reviewer: > does this mean that _every individual namespace_ opts into the “type: reject” signature enforcement, by adding a per-namespace `ImagePolicy` object?

… and how does a namespace that does not have any special policies opt into signature enforcement? By creating an `ImagePolicy` for `registry.invalid/this/matches/nothing`? (RFC 6761). That is potentially quite confusing.

Is there a reason to think that every namespace that opts in will want its own rules?

(I can accept an argument that opting into enforcing the cluster’s default policy without an extra rule is not necessary in the first version. It’s, at least, something to think about WRT future API evolution.)

>     ```

Author: > I think it makes a lot of sense to allow gradual signature implementation: starting with a cluster that enforces _no_ signatures, make it possible to sign individual applications one at a time, adding `ImagePolicy` CRs one at a time, gradually tightening the security for those applications without disrupting everyone else.

I think that makes sense.
cc @saschagrunert
 We may have to point out that the ImagePolicy CR should not change the `default` cluster-wide.  And the `default` of each ` \<NAMESPACE\>.json` will be the same as the cluster-wide `default` in `/etc/containers/policy.json`.  The `default` might be `insecureAcceptAnything` or `reject`,  depending on the Image CR.

>     ```

Reviewer 2: Yes, this makes sense to me as well!

>     ```

Reviewer: ACK, keeping the default a cluster-wide decision makes sense for a first version. We can figure out how to tighten that later.

  - adds [/etc/containers/registries.d/*.yaml](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.d.5.md) to allow matching sigstore signatures, for example:

    ```yaml
    docker:
      my-registry/image:
        use-sigstore-attachments: true
    ```

    Alternatively, we can enable it node wide:

    ```yaml
    default-docker:
      use-sigstore-attachments: true
    ```

> - merges cluster scoped with namespaced ImagePolicy as a json string and update `status` of each ImagePolicy.

Author: addressed the merge rules: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-688e8f3b56284c3f0e907836b95cbcb60bcd0676c4819a2e4b1524529bf8d5c5R256

Once an ImagePolicy object gets created/updated, container runtime config controller will call the syncHandler.
Once an ImagePolicy object gets deleted, container runtime config controller will delete the machine config and run the syncHandler

#### Notes

ImagePolicy is defined as namespaced CRD. `namespace: openshift-config` is used for cluster policy.

### Risks and Mitigations

Risk: The cluster scoped and namespace policies overwrite

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.   

Author: addressed the merge rules: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-688e8f3b56284c3f0e907836b95cbcb60bcd0676c4819a2e4b1524529bf8d5c5R256

> What happens when an unprivileged namespace first creates a policy, and _afterwards_ a cluster admin adds a cluster-wide policy that conflicts?

This  update will be rejected.

@mtrmac @saschagrunert could you take a look?

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.   

Reviewer: Thanks, that’s a good solution.

MCO container runtime config controller can add unit tests and e2e tests.
- unit test: verify the policies from ImagePolicy instances merged correctly and the controller writes correct format policy.json
- e2e test: verify the MCO writes configuration to the correct location

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage
- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers
- Enumerate service level indicators (SLIs), expose SLIs as metrics
- Write symptoms-based alerts for the component(s)

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Backhaul SLI telemetry
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

#### Removing a deprecated feature

Not applicable.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Upgrade expectations:

> In order to use ImagePolicy, an existing cluster will have to make on upgrade.

Reviewer 4: Have to make what?  Can we expand this section?

From [the template][1], the following points seem worth considering:

> What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing cluster required to make on upgrade in order to keep previous behavior?

Are the CRI-O config knobs the new resource exposes something that some existing customers might  be managing via bare MachineConfig resources?  If so, how are conflicts resolved?  How are conflicts surfaced to a user who might be surprised by them?

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/4f18064f4ad9124efec465c59346e37171c0fcc9/guidelines/enhancement_template.md#upgrade--downgrade-strategy

Downgrade expectations: 
- Not applicable. 
  If `N` does not support ImagePolicy CRD, `N+1`supports IamgePolicy. It is not expected that the ImagePolicy related to the failure `N->N+1`. New resources should not be created during `N->N+1`.

### Version Skew Strategy

> The MCO does not require skew check.

Reviewer 4: The following [template point][1] seems worth considering:

> Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave when this feature is used?

Are the CRI-O knobs being tuned something that all CRI-Os understand?  And will continue to understand?  Because if the machine-config operator on 4.y sets a setting that 4.(y-2) CRI-O doesn't understand, that seems like it could cause trouble for that node.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/4f18064f4ad9124efec465c59346e37171c0fcc9/guidelines/enhancement_template.md#version-skew-strategy

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

> - Use-cases that requires over 1000 instances of the CRD is rare, not impacting

Author: yeah... I am uncertain about the proportion of the clusters that will configure the maximum number of namespaces.

> - Use-cases that requires over 1000 instances of the CRD is rare, not impacting

Reviewer: I don’t think the proportion of such clusters is decisive; even if it were 0.1 %, and such clusters are currently supported, there are (absent other arrangements) expected to continue to work on an OpenShift upgrade.

    general API throughput.

#### Failure Modes

- CR field syntax error failure reported from CLI
- CR conflicting value failure reported by machine config controller logs
- MCO rolling out configuration file failure reported by MCO
- If the signature validation fails, then CRI-O will report that in the same way as for any other pull failure. Further enhancements to the kubelet, CRI and CRI-O error handling can be achieved in future Kubernetes releases.

> The above errors should not impact the overall cluster health

Reviewer: (Rolling out a `policy.json` that completely breaks the ability to pull updated images, e.g. for the control plane pods, could be a major problem for a cluster.

Maybe it’s not very different from many other configurations that MCO is managing? Or is it special, and worth some kind of pre-validation?

We do have a special case protecting users against blocking the OCP product repo.)

Author: I incline towards preventing the user from setting an ImagePolicy for the OCP product repo. I think the OCP product repos maintained by us are safe enough to use without requiring signature verification?

From the previous [discussion](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1943315#c5), a node drain is required when deleting ICSP to detect image access failure. I am not sure if the node drain& reboot can trigger the CRI-O image pull? If it can trigger the image pull, we can also require the node drain as a pre-validation. But from the feedback of ICSP,  there are customers who request to not have node drain.

Reviewer: > I think the OCP product repos maintained by us are safe enough to use without requiring signature verification?

AFAIK OCP doesn’t currently use sigstore; it uses a somewhat-OpenShift-specific variant of simple signing to sign the top-level release image, and all other product images are referenced using digests embedded in that release image.

> I am not sure if the node drain& reboot can trigger the CRI-O image pull?

I think the primary thing to worry is https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blame/c1a6a342f095553957db9d34aa7881a10b00badf/templates/master/01-master-container-runtime/_base/files/crio.yaml#L6 . But, really, any `policy.json` change (regardless of reboot or image drain) could result in a node that can’t run that control plane pod any more.

(This also links about the discussion about how this is implemented/enforced in CRI-O: does that really happen only o image _pull_, or effectively on every container creation? The latter would make the impact clearly fairly high-risk.

---

WRT possible pre-validation, at least parsing `policy.json`, and possibly evaluating it against a registry source (assuming the registry is reachable!) could be done before actually deploying the configuration. That’s not _too_ much code to potentially run directly inside MCO, though it would be more accurate to run _exactly_ CRI-O’s implementation (to detect cases where MCO is generating a new version of `policy.json` that CRI-O can’t process), and that would require a new CRI-O CLI command or something like that.

Author: Addressed that it will not allow configuring a policy for OCP product repo. The validation will parse the scopes to validate that the policy is not for scopes under the OCP product repo.

Reviewer: ACK.

Reviewer 6: > Addressed that it will not allow configuring a policy for OCP product repo. The validation will parse the scopes to validate that the policy is not for scopes under the OCP product repo.

Is this in the API anywhere? I didn't see it documented within the API, nor validated, it should be explained to users at the API level that they cannot configure the policy for openshift repositories

Author: fixed https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-688e8f3b56284c3f0e907836b95cbcb60bcd0676c4819a2e4b1524529bf8d5c5R107

OCP Node team is likely to be called upon in case of escalation with one of the failure modes.

#### Support Procedures

- detect the failure modes in a support situation, describe possible symptoms (events, metrics,
  alerts, which log output in which component)
  - If the ImagePolicy CR does not follow the syntax requirements, api-server will fail when creating the objects.
  - If the ImagePolicy CR is not rolled out by MCO, machine-config-controller logs will shows error with the reason.

> 

Reviewer 4: If the policy is too strict for an image and it fails to pull, will logs show which policy was violated and... then folks have to know about the ImagePolicy CRD out of band to be able to map that CRI-O complaint back up to the conflicting ImagePolicy, if they decide to address the conflict by adjusting policy instead of by adjusting the image they're pulling?

Also in this bucket are network-config issues that block the cluster from being able to access the signature store.  Are there proxy/restricted-network considerations for either implementation or debug-ability?

Reviewer: > Are there proxy/restricted-network considerations for either implementation or debug-ability?

The signatures are stored in the same registry repos as the images themselves, so this does not introduce a new point of failure.

There is _some_ potential for the registry reporting “image not found” on the signature fake-image, and that would show up for the user as “signature missing” without directly pointing at the registry as a culprit.

---

A user-visible process change for disconnected users is the need to mirror signatures together with the application images. I don’t know which of the `oc` mirroring subcommands support that.

  - "@saschagrunert, for API design, implementation details and graduation criteria"
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - "@mrunalp"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - "@mrunalp"
creation-date: yyyy-mm-dd
last-updated: yyyy-mm-dd
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-1628
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/this-other-neat-thing.md"
replaces:
  - "/enhancements/that-less-than-great-idea.md"
superseded-by:
  - "/enhancements/our-past-effort.md"
---

# Add CRD ImagePolicy to config.openshift.io/v1alpha1

## Summary

> This enhancement propose an ImagePolicy CRD to provide a way to set image signature verification configuration on Openshift.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This enhancement propose an ImagePolicy CRD to provide a way to set sigstore image signature verification configuration on Openshift.
```

## Motivation

### User Stories

As an OpenShift user, I want to verify the container images signed using sigstore
tools, so that I can utilize the increased security of my software supply chain.

> The user can create an ImagePolicy instance specifying the images/repositories to be verified and their policy. The MCO will write the configuration for signature verification. Once this is done, CRI-O can verify the images/repositories.

Reviewer 2: That's not a user story, let's move it to `Summary` or `Goals`.

### Goals

> - MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single containers-policy.json in a predefined /path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.
```

> - CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy by using the namespace from the sandbox config on the `PullImage` RPC
```

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for adding signature verification configurations in
cluster scope.
1. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file with `namespace: opesnhift-config`.
2. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy instance using `oc create -f imagepolicy.yaml`.
3. The cluster administrator can get the merged cluster scope policies from `status` of ImagePolicy instances. 
4. The cluster administrator can delete the signature verification configuration by deleting its ImagePolicy instances. 

**application administrator** is a human user responsible for
adding signature verification configurations for specific namespace.

1. The application administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file for namespace that is not `namespace: opesnhift-config`
2. The application administrator creates ImagePolicy instance using `oc create -f imagepolicy.yaml`.
3. The application administrator can get the merged cluster policy and policy for certain namespace from `status` of ImagePolicy instances. 
4. The application administrator can delete the signature verification configuration by deleting its ImagePolicy instances. 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. The application administrator cannot override cluster scoped policies because they will treated with a higher priority.
```

### API Extensions

#### Type definitions

```go
type ImagePolicySpec struct {

> 	// images holds images/repositories to be verified

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// Images holds images/repositories to be verified
```

Author: Checked some apis from https://github.com/openshift/api/tree/master/config/v1 This comment will be in the generated CRD schemas description, we should use the name defined in the json tag.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, thank you for the clarification.

> 	Images []Image `json:"images"`

Reviewer 2: Do we want to make this a list of `string`? This way we could avoid the `Image` type at all but may close the door for future enhancements (I don't have anything specific in mind yet).

Author: Image type can let us add [kubebuilder](https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/markers/crd-validation.html) regex pattern for each image string to help the CRD validation.
I think we can use [helpers](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docker/reference/regexp.go) to define the regex once we decide on the format.

> 	// policy defines the verification policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// Policy defines the verification policy
```

	Policy Policy `json:"policy"`
}

// Image defines the list of images assigned to a policy.
// For more information about the format, see the document
// about the location field:
// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/
// docs/containers-policy.json.5.md#docker
type Image struct {

> 	Hostname string `json:"hostname,omitempty"`

Author: I agree scope matches the doc.
BTW I changed this from `type Image string` because the `hostname` from [googledoc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16MQg6yVmvp1xkkgKAa1fUyCAbxZeq916IXznLAJmg6Q/edit?disco=AAAAxC2lpEc).
I understand it as this field will not include a tag or digest, since the cosign-created signatures only contain a repository?

we can just define this `type Image string`, without the key `scope`, and define the format of this field by using the kubebuilder regex and documents. Based on the above [comment](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1196061110), we prefer without adding the `scope`?

	// SubjectEmail holds the email address of the subject.
	// Example: "expected-signing-user@example.com"
	// Requires OIDCIssuer to be set and KeyData to be empty.
	SubjectEmail string `json:"subjectEmail,omitempty"`

	// KeyData contains inline base64 data of the public key.
	// Can be empty if the image got signed keyless.
	// Requires OIDCIssuer and SubjectEmail to be empty.
	KeyData string `json:"keyData,omitempty"`

	// SignedIdentity specifies what image identity the signature
	// claims about the image.
	SignedIdentity Identity `json:"signedIdentity,omitempty"`

	// FulcioCAData contains inline base64 data for the fulcio
	// CA certificate.
	// Defaults to the base64 encoded contents of:
	// https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sigstore/root-signing/main/
	// targets/fulcio_v1.crt.pem
	// QUESTION: Can we omit it in favor of the upstream default?
	FulcioCAData string `json:"fulcioCAData,omitempty"`

	// RekorKeyData contains inline base64 data of the rekor public key.
	// Defaults to the base64 encoded contents of:
	// https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sigstore/root-signing/main/
	// targets/rekor.pub
	// QUESTION: Can we omit it in favor of the upstream default?

> 	RekorKeyData string `json:"rekorKeyData,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Let's drop it, we just use the defaults and can add the fields in a later API iteration.

}

type Identity struct {
	// Defaults to "matchRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicy IdentityMatchPolicy `json:"identityMatchPolicy,…"`
	Prefix              string              `json:"prefix,omitempty"`
	SignedPrefix        string              `json:"signedPrefix,omitempty"`
	DockerReference     string              `json:"dockerReference,omitempty"`

> 	DockerRepository    string              `json:"dockerRepository,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need those

Author: I kept `DockerRepository`  for `exactRepository`

}

type IdentityMatchPolicy string

const (
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepository        = "matchRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchExact             = "matchExact"
	IdentityMatchPolicyRemapIdentity          = "remapIdentity"
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepoDigestOrExact = "matchRepoDigestOrExact"
	IdentityMatchPolicyExactRepository   = "exactRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyExactReference    = "exactReference"

> )

Reviewer 2: We should avoid having types which are not usable, from the docs:
> Note that cosign-created signatures only contain a repository, so only matchRepository and exactRepository can be used to accept them (and that does not protect against substitution of a signed image with an unexpected tag).

We probably want to keep `remapIdentity` as well, but the other can be dropped.

Author: hmm, containers/image uses `matchRepoDigestOrExact` semantics for `remapIdentity`

type ImagePolicyStatus struct {
	// PolicyJSON contains the whole policy applied to the namespace
	// which got written to disk. This includes cluster-wide policies
	// from the `openshift-config` namespace as well.
	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

	// QUESTION: DO we need conditions?

> 	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Conditions I would define:
- **Pending**: Resource exists but waiting to be created
- **Creating**: Resource is currently created
- **Available**: Everything is up to date (on every node)
- **Updating**: Resource is being updated
- **Deleting**: Resource is being deleted

Author: would define these to the openshfit/api.

enhancement:

- Maturity levels
  - [`alpha`, `beta`, `stable` in upstream Kubernetes][maturity-levels]
  - `Dev Preview`, `Tech Preview`, `GA` in OpenShift
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning),
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general, we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless how the functionality is accessed.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

**If this is a user facing change requiring new or updated documentation in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/),
please be sure to include in the graduation criteria.**

**Examples**: These are generalized examples to consider, in addition
to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end

> - End user documentation, relative API stability

Reviewer 2: For the API: We could add custom rekor/fulcio instance support at that stage by extending the API.

Author: Added the api extension to dev preview -> tech preview. The rest `Graduation Criteria` sections are from the enhancement template. can you take a look?

---
title: add-ImagePolicy-to-config.openshift.io-v1alpha1
authors:
  - "@QiWang19"
reviewers: # Include a comment about what domain expertise a reviewer is expected to bring and what area of the enhancement you expect them to focus on. For example: - "@networkguru, for networking aspects, please look at IP bootstrapping aspect"
  - "@saschagrunert, for API design, implementation details and graduation criteria"
  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@yuqi-zhang"
  - "@mtrmac"
  - "@wking"
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - "@mrunalp"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"

>   - "@mrunalp"

Reviewer 7: Add @JoelSpeed here.

  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-1628
---

# Add CRD ImagePolicy to config.openshift.io/v1alpha1

## Summary

This enhancement propose an ImagePolicy CRD to provide a way to set sigstore image signature verification configuration on Openshift.

## Motivation

### User Stories

As an OpenShift user, I want to verify the container images signed using sigstore
tools, so that I can utilize the increased security of my software supply chain.

### Goals

- The user can create an ImagePolicy instance specifying the images/repositories to be verified and their policy. The MCO will write the configuration for signature verification. Once this is done, CRI-O can verify the images/repositories.

- MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

- CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy by using the namespace from the sandbox config on the `PullImage` RPC.

### Non-Goals

> - Do not allow configure policy for OCP product repo

Reviewer 7: Not sure what we mean by this. Are we talking about access to the openshift payload and referenced images?

Author: The openshift payload repositories.
 https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-688e8f3b56284c3f0e907836b95cbcb60bcd0676c4819a2e4b1524529bf8d5c5R344

- Providing a tool to mirror the signatures is out of the scope of this enhancement. In order to verify the signature, the disconnected users need to mirror signatures together with the application images. 

> - Do not grant the application administrator the ability to weaken cluster-scoped policies, to avoid expanding the set of administrators capable of increasing cluster exposure to vulnerable images.

Reviewer 7: We can drop the negative since these are non-goals.

- CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy by using the namespace from the sandbox config on the `PullImage` RPC.

### Non-Goals

- Allow configure policy for OCP product repo
- Providing a tool to mirror the signatures is out of the scope of this enhancement. In order to verify the signature, the disconnected users need to mirror signatures together with the application images. 
- Grant the application administrator the ability to weaken cluster-scoped policies, to avoid expanding the set of administrators capable of increasing cluster exposure to vulnerable images.
- Grant the application administrator the ability to tighten cluster-scoped policies. This could be useful in the future, but we are deferring it to limit the amount of work needed for an initial implementation.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for adding signature verification configurations in
cluster scope.
1. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file with `namespace: openshift-config`.
2. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy instance using `oc create -f imagepolicy.yaml`.

> 3. The cluster administrator can get the merged cluster scope policies from `status` of ImagePolicy instances. 

Reviewer 8: Can you more elaborate on how the status will look when two or more cluster-scoped image policies are merged? E.g. providing an example.

Author: I added the example that explains the result of `status.policyJSON` https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/f717389a3149dd11443ba51d838853a98911669a/enhancements/api-review/add-ImagePolicy-to-config.openshift.io-v1alpha1.md#example-of-imagepolicy-crs
namespace scope CRs will display the policy applied within the namespace and cluster-scoped policies that override. It should be safe to display these public keys.

### API Extensions

#### Type definitions

```go
// +genclient
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object

// ImagePolicy holds namespace-wide configuration configuration for image signature verification
//
// Compatibility level 4: No compatibility is provided, the API can change at any point for any reason. These capabilities should not be used by applications needing long term support.
// +openshift:compatibility-gen:level=4
// +openshift:enable:FeatureSets=TechPreviewNoUpgrade
type ImagePolicy struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	// metadata is the standard object's metadata.
	// More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#metadata
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	// spec holds user settable values for configuration
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +required
	Spec ImagePolicySpec `json:"spec"`
	// status contains the observed state of the resource.
	// +optional
	Status ImagePolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// ImagePolicySpec is the specification of the ImagePolicy CRD.
type ImagePolicySpec struct {

> 	// scopes defines the list of image identities assigned to a policy. Each item refers to an image or repository in a registry implementing the "Docker Registry HTTP API V2".

Author: @saschagrunert @mtrmac  do we consider supporting transport besides docker or leave space for future implementation? I think that other transports are for images from local storage locations

> 	// scopes defines the list of image identities assigned to a policy. Each item refers to an image or repository in a registry implementing the "Docker Registry HTTP API V2".

Reviewer 2: I don't see a use case other than the docker scope. But maybe @mtrmac has something in mind.

> 	// scopes defines the list of image identities assigned to a policy. Each item refers to an image or repository in a registry implementing the "Docker Registry HTTP API V2".

Author: > Even with only a docker scope supported you can simplify the regex with DockerScope struct. To make sure a namespace is specified when an image is, you can use +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule validation.

@ingvagabund  This can simplify the regex to validate the scopes. Will this make it too complicated for the customers to write the yaml?

> 	// scopes defines the list of image identities assigned to a policy. Each item refers to an image or repository in a registry implementing the "Docker Registry HTTP API V2".

Reviewer 8: Good point. Agree customers will prefer to use a simpler way of specifying the string. Feel free to dismiss the `DockerScope`.

> 	// scopes defines the list of image identities assigned to a policy. Each item refers to an image or repository in a registry implementing the "Docker Registry HTTP API V2".

Reviewer: I don’t think we need to consider non-Docker scopes much. As it happens, I was looking into what CRI-O does, and while it, strictly speaking, does allow using other transports (via a `DefaultTransport` option), the implementation is, for a long time, only accepting a registry-like syntax, and only for transports which can map to a registry reference (because the remote image, using an arbitrary transport, must be pulled into local storage, and local storage names look like registry references). I’m this >< close to proposing to hard-code the `docker://` transport in CRI-O.

I’m tempted to say that if we ever needed to support other transports, that’s unlikely enough that we could deal with that by introducing a whole new top-level CRD, `SomeOtherTransportImagePolicy`. That’s always an option, isn’t it?

---

If anything, I’m worried about adding more wildcard syntaxes, or something like that, not about adding more transports. That did happen before.

But, do we need an enum here at all? Or would it be valid WRT the API evolution rules, instead, to add a new `ImagePolicySpec.SomeNewKindOfScopes` field?

---

> ```go
> type DockerScope struct {
> ```

Just so that this naming doesn‘t propagate, `s/DockerScope/RegistryScope/` in any such things (if we needed a new field), please, to keep one of my colleagues happy.

> 	// scopes defines the list of image identities assigned to a policy. Each item refers to an image or repository in a registry implementing the "Docker Registry HTTP API V2".

Reviewer: > Or, is it possible one might be allowed/need to provide more configuration in the future?

The scope key in `policy.json` is a single string. _Hypothetically_, that doesn’t prevent that string from carrying multiple fields using some built-in syntax, where OCP might indeed want to use a struct with individual fields.

WRT `ImagePolicy.Spec.Scopes` being an array of strings vs. an array of structs, I don’t have a strong opinion. I think it’s pretty unlikely that we would ever want to add a field, OTOH in a completely different application I did see us painted into a corner because values were strings with no ability to extend, so I have some sympathy for wanting to be careful/extensible here.

_If_ the new top-level field (`SomeNewKindOfScopes` above) is an option, I think wanting to extend scopes is sufficiently unlikely that a a more ergonomic array of strings is preferable; that’s a pretty weak opinion.

type ImageScope string

// Policy defines the verification policy for the items in the scopes list.
type Policy struct {
	// rootOfTrust specifies the public key, the Fulcio certificate and the Rekor public key.
	// Requires only one of keyData or fulcioCAData must be set.
	// +required
	RootOfTrust PolicyRootOfTrust `json:"rootOfTrust"`

	// fulcioSubject specifies OIDC issuer and the email of the fulcio authentication configuration.
	// Required if rootOfTrust.fulcioCAData is set.
	// +optional
	FulcioSubject PolicyFulcioSubject `json:"fulcioSubject,omitempty"`

	// signedIdentity specifies what image identity the signature claims about the image.
	// +optional
	SignedIdentity PolicyIdentity `json:"signedIdentity,omitempty"`
}

// PolicyRootOfTrust defines the public key, the Fulcio certificate and the Rekor public key.

> type PolicyRootOfTrust struct {

Reviewer 8: I wonder whether the dependencies between the fields can be simplified.

Reviewer 6: +1 to this

	// keyData contains inline base64 data of the public key.
	// keyData can be empty if the image got signed keyless.

> 	// Requires only one of keyData and fulcioCAData must be set.

Reviewer 8: Does at least one of `keyData` and `fulcioCAData` have to be always specified? Or, can `RekorKeyData` be the only field that is set?

Author: Exactly one of keyData and fulcioCAData must be set. Setting only RekorKeyData is not valid.

Reviewer 8: Can `RekorKeyData` be set for both keyData and fulcioCAData? Or, `RekorKeyData` has no use for `keyData`? If it has no use, can it have any use in the future?

Author: `rekorKeyData` is optional to `keyData`. The valid configuration for `rootOfTrust` is one of:
- keyData + rekorKeyData
- keyData
- fulcioCAData + rekorKeyData

Reviewer: FWIW medium-term evolution here:

It might be the case that there will be a `timestampAuthorityKeyData` as an _alternative_ to `rekorKeyData`. In that case, we would accept the 3 combinations @QiWang19 lists above, + 3 more with `s/rekor/timestampAuthority/g`.

(Using a RFC 3161 timestamp server instead of Rekor is not currently implemented in c/image. But it makes more sense to me than Rekor, Cosign supports it, and I’d like to eventually add that as well.)

Reviewer 6: What is the difference between keyData and fulcioCAData to the end user? Im wondering if they need to be separate fields, or whether we could have a keyType field that allowed the consumer to understand the difference. It would be required to be set by the user to determine which type to use, and then validation could be keyed off of this

Looking at the layout of the fields around this, I expect a discrminated union would be best that has a fulcio struct with all of the fulcio related fields present

Author: If we have to use the union, I guess we will have the `PolicyType` field, and this enum type allows all the valid combinations of the signature. And if more certificates are supported, we will extend the valid value of the `PolicyType` and the structs for that `PolicyType`. something like:

```go
// +union
type PolicySource struct {
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=PublicKeyOnly;PublicKeyWithRekor;FulcioCA
	PolicyType         string             `json:"policyType,omitempty"`
	PublicKeyOnly      PublicKeyOnly      `json:"publicKeyOnly,omitempty"`
	PublicKeyWithRekor PublicKeyWithRekor `json:"publicKeyWithRekor,omitempty"`
	FulcioCA           FulcioCA           `json:"fulcioCA,omitempty"`
}

type PublicKeyOnly struct {
	KeyData PGPKey `json:"keyData,omitempty"`
}

type PublicKeyWithRekor struct {
	KeyData      PGPKey       `json:"keyData,omitempty"`
	RekorKeyData RekorKeyData `json:"rekorKeyData,omitempty"`
}

type FulcioCA struct {
	FulcioCAData  FulcioCAData              `json:"fulcioCAData,omitempty"`
	FulcioSubject PolicyFulcioSubject     `json:"fulcioSubject,omitempty"`
	RekorKeyData  RekorKeyData           `json:"rekorKeyData,omitempty"`
}
```

Author: @mtrmac @JoelSpeed  will the above struct look better?

Reviewer: > What is the difference between keyData and fulcioCAData to the end user? Im wondering if they need to be separate fields, or whether we could have a keyType field that allowed the consumer to understand the difference.

I can’t see any benefit to this. The two use different formats (a public key vs. a certificate), and are used in different ways.

As is, we have two validation rules:
- ≥ 1 of `keyData` and `fulcioCAData` must be present
- ≤ 1 of `keyData` and `fulcioCAData` must be present
(or maybe that’s one “exactly 1 of…” rule, depending on how you are counting)

and other rules (`rekorKeyData` must be set if Fulcio is set) are conditioned on “is `fulcioCAData present`?”
 
With a key type, we would have:
- `keyType must be set`
- `abstractKeyData` must be set
and other rules  (`rekorKeyData` must be set if Fulcio is set) are conditioned on “is `keyType == keyTypeFulcio`?”.

So that’s about the same.

---

Using a discriminated union to separate the public-key root of trust, and the Fulcio-based root of trust, sure, why not.

Reviewer: Note to self: Compare earlier discussion in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1223488325 .

Reviewer: > @mtrmac @JoelSpeed will the above struct look better?

- WRT using a discriminated union for the public key vs. Fulcio, sure, why not, I’ll defer to k8s API experts.
- Do consider that we might add a support for a RFC 3161 timestamp authority instead of Rekor (https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1330659095 ). Would Fulcio+rfc3161 be a new enum case, or a new field in the existing Fulcio case?
- On the topic of explicit discriminated unions, do we _need_ to set that up in advance for `FulcioSubject`? https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1242453618 Can that be done safely later?
- I’d prefer having a single “public key” case, with an optional Rekor field. I don’t feel strongly about this (and see above about RFC 3161 timestamps).
- I’m not too happy with the `PolicySource` name. “Source” of what? https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1242453618 names that `…SignatureAcceptanceRule`, which is too long and unergonomic.

Reviewer 6: Names of fields can be sorted out based on SME and API reviewer conversation, that doesn't matter too much for now, but yes, a disrciminated union is the _correct_ way to structure this to be K8s like.

I would expect it to be something like (ignore names for now, we can work this out)
```
verificationPolicy:
  type: PublicKey | Fulcio
  publicKey: # Required iff type == PublicKey, forbidden otherwise
    keyData: <blah> # Required
    rekorKeyData: <blah> # optional
    ... # Whatever options are relevant here
  fulcio: # Required iff type == Fulcio, forbidden otherwise
    subject: {} # Required
    caData: <blah> # Required
    rekorKeyData: <blah> # Optional
    ... # Whatever options are relevant here
```
Lets discuss the permutation tomorrow

Author: updated the API to use the discriminated union

	// "ExactRepository" means that the identity in the signature must be in the same repository as a specific identity specified by "repository".
	// "RemapIdentity" means that the signature must be in the same as the remapped image identity. Remapped image identity is obtained by replacing the "remapPrefix" with the specified “remapSignedPrefix” if the the image identity matches the specified remapPrefix.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=MatchRepoDigestOrExact;MatchRepository;ExactRepository;RemapIdentity
	// +required
	MatchPolicy IdentityMatchPolicy `json:"matchPolicy,omitempty"`
	// reference is the reference of the image identity to be matched. This field is required if identityMatchPolicy is set to "exactReference".
	// +optional
	Repository string `json:"repository,omitempty"`
	// remapPrefix is the prefix of the image identity to be matched. This field is required if identityMatchPolicy is set to "RemapIdentity".
	// +optional
	RemapPrefix string `json:"remapPrefix,omitempty"`
	// remapSignedPrefix is the prefix of the image identity to be matched in the signature. This field is required if identityMatchPolicy is set to "RemapIdentity".
	// +optional

> 	RemapSignedPrefix string `json:"remapSignedPrefix,omitempty"`

Author: @ingvagabund  Do you suggest the following?
I will keep the enum type for the MCO implementation to use.
```go
type PolicyIdentity struct {
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=MatchRepoDigestOrExact;MatchRepository;ExactRepository;RemapIdentity
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	MatchPolicy IdentityMatchPolicy `json:"matchPolicy,omitempty"`
	// +optional
	ExactRepository *ExactRepository `json:"exactRepository,omitempty"`
	// +optional
	RemapIdentity *RemapIdentity `json:"remapIdentity,omitempty"`
}

type ExactRepository struct {
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	Repository string `json:"repository,omitempty"`
}

type RemapIdentity struct {
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	Prefix string `json:"prefix,omitempty"`
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	SignedPrefix string `json:"signedPrefix,omitempty"`
}
```

> 	RemapSignedPrefix string `json:"remapSignedPrefix,omitempty"`

Reviewer 8: This looks good. Can you also specify `// +unionDiscriminator` for `MatchPolicy`?

}

// IdentityMatchPolicy defines the type of matching for setting "matchPolicy".

> // Valid values are "MatchRepoDigestOrExact", "MatchRepository", "ExactRepository", "RemapIdentity". When omitted, the default value is "MatchRepoDigestOrExact".

Author: It is always guaranteed. If the field is not specified, the container runtime will always use the `MatchRepoDigestOrExact` as the default.

> // Valid values are "MatchRepoDigestOrExact", "MatchRepository", "ExactRepository", "RemapIdentity". When omitted, the default value is "MatchRepoDigestOrExact".

Reviewer 8: Can the container runtime guarantee the default value will never change? Safer to state the default value is a subject to change. E.g.:
```
// When omitted, the container runtime defaults to "MatchRepoDigestOrExact".
// These defaults are subject to change over time.
```

> // Valid values are "MatchRepoDigestOrExact", "MatchRepository", "ExactRepository", "RemapIdentity". When omitted, the default value is "MatchRepoDigestOrExact".

Reviewer: I’d say it’s… sufficiently guaranteed; it has been stable for longer than OCP 4 has existed:

The default is a documented property of the config file. That file is intended to be used in production deployments and we don’t intend to break users.

Uh… except that we did change the default, once. But that was in 2016, within the first 3 months of the existence of `policy.json` (and before Podman existed). And that change did not, AFAIK, break any existing deployments; it allowed new situations where a valid signature was accepted. That could have, in theory, broken someone’s security design, but that would have been a very unexpected security design.

> // Valid values are "MatchRepoDigestOrExact", "MatchRepository", "ExactRepository", "RemapIdentity". When omitted, the default value is "MatchRepoDigestOrExact".

Reviewer: Pragmatically speaking, most users should not need to make a choice here, and for those users we would want to, similarly, reserve the _technical capability_ to change the behavior to “continue to do the right thing under changing circumstances” (which I hope we would never need to do).

I think anything that forces users to think what `repoDigestOrExact` means for them, or suggests to them that they should be explicitly hard-coding that policy, is a net detriment.

---

Also, there’s still one more layer of compatibility levers: Even if `policy.json` did change in incompatible ways, there’s still OCP’s `machine-config-operator` in between, so the MCO could adapt to that (hypothetical and expected) `policy.json` change by generating a `policy.json` that hard-codes the compatible choice.

IOW, OCP is fully in control of the compatibility here, so I see absolutely no reason to seed doubt about OCP’s _capability_ to not break users, nor to make anything more complex for users in order to preserve workloads.

---

That said, whether we document this “the default value is `MatchRepoDigestOrExact`”, or “the default value Does The Right Thing, don’t you worry”, I can see arguments for either.

Given the almost-7-hear-history of the current default, I think the former is preferable because it reassures and explains things better.

	// For more information about the format, see the document
	// about the docker transport field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md#docker
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +required
	// +listType=set
	Scopes []ImageScope `json:"scopes"`
	// policy defines the verification policy for the items in the scopes list
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +required
	Policy Policy `json:"policy"`
}

// ImageScope is the item of the scopes list.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^\*(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+$|^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(((?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+(?::[0-9]+)?)|(:[0-9]+))(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+:([\w][\w.-]{0,127}))?(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+@([A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*(?:[-_+.][A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*)*[:][[:xdigit:]]{32,}))?$`
type ImageScope string

// Policy defines the verification policy for the items in the scopes list.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="(has(self.rootOfTrust) && has(self.rootOfTrust.fulcioCAData)) ? has(self.fulcioSubject) : true",message="fulcioSubject must be set if fulcioCAData is set"

Reviewer: Should this be something like
```suggestion
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="(has(self.rootOfTrust) && has(self.rootOfTrust.fulcioCAData)) == has(self.fulcioSubject)",message="fulcioSubject must be set exactly when fulcioCAData is set"
```
(warning: I’m not familiar with the validation language)

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="has(self.fulcioSubject) ? has(self.fulcioSubject.oidcIssuer) && has(self.fulcioSubject.signedEmail): true",message="oidcIssuer and signedEmail must be set if fulcioSubject is set"

Reviewer: Isn’t this covered by the `required` annotations on those fields?

(I have no idea, I don’t know the validation language.)

My (not very important) concern here is that it seems possible that we will add more fields / alternatives to `FulcioSubject`, and in that case it seems easier to maintain if the validation of the required fields / allowed field combinations only exists in one place, instead of two like it is now.

Author: I found the `required` does not work for the nested struct. the `required` does not appear in the auto-generated CRD yaml. 
I think we can keep the annotation here just to explain the field usage.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="has(self.signedIdentity) ? has(self.signedIdentity.matchPolicy): true",message="matchPolicy must be set if signedIdentity is set"

Reviewer: Yet the field is defined as optional. Is that intentional?

(The concern about duplicating the validation applies similarly, though even less urgently because `signedIdentity` is a bit less likely to need expansion.)

Author: mark the `matchPolicy` required  . 

Dropped these validations from the API defination. I just remembered that we can move these dependency validation to https://github.com/openshift/kubernetes/tree/master/openshift-kube-apiserver/admission/customresourcevalidation.

Reviewer: I’m afraid I have no idea what is the difference and tradeoffs between the two approaches.

Author: > My (not very important) concern here is that it seems possible that we will add more fields / alternatives to FulcioSubject, and in that case it seems easier to maintain if the validation of the required fields / allowed field combinations only exists in one place, instead of two like it is now.

I thought the https://github.com/openshift/kubernetes/tree/master/openshift-kube-apiserver/admission/customresourcevalidation give us one place to put these validations.  But openshift/api provides a way to test these validations by directly reading the manifest yaml.

type Policy struct {
	// rootOfTrust specifies the public key, the Fulcio certificate and the Rekor public key.
	// Requires only one of keyData or fulcioCAData must be set.
	// +required
	RootOfTrust PolicyRootOfTrust `json:"rootOfTrust"`

	// fulcioSubject specifies OIDC issuer and the email of the fulcio authentication configuration.
	// Required if rootOfTrust.fulcioCAData is set.
	// +optional
	FulcioSubject PolicyFulcioSubject `json:"fulcioSubject,omitempty"`

	// signedIdentity specifies what image identity the signature claims about the image.
	// +optional
	SignedIdentity PolicyIdentity `json:"signedIdentity,omitempty"`
}

// PolicyRootOfTrust defines the public key, the Fulcio certificate and the Rekor public key.
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="has(self.fulcioCAData) ? has(self.rekorKeyData) : true",message="rekorKeyData must be set if fulcioCAData is set"

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="has(self.keyData) != has(self.fulcioCAData)",message="only one of keyData and fulcioCAData must be set"

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="has(self.keyData) != has(self.fulcioCAData)",message="exactly one of keyData and fulcioCAData must be set"
```

// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="has(self.matchPolicy) && self.matchPolicy == 'RemapIdentity' ? has(self.remapPrefix) && has(self.remapSignedPrefix) : true",message="must set remapPrefix and remapSignedPrefix if matchPolicy is RemapIdentity"
type PolicyIdentity struct {
	// matchPolicy sets the type of matching to be used.
	// Valid values are "MatchRepoDigestOrExact", "MatchRepository", "ExactRepository", "RemapIdentity". When omitted, the default value is "MatchRepoDigestOrExact".
	// If set matchPolicy to ExactRepository, then the repository must be specified.
	// If set matchPolicy to remapIdentity, then the remapPrefix, and remapSignedPrefix must be specified.
	// "MatchRepoDigestOrExact" means that the identity in the signature must be in the same repository as the image identity if the image identity is referenced by a digest. Otherwise, the identity in the signature must be the same as the image identity.
	// "MatchRepository" means that the identity in the signature must be in the same repository as the image identity.

> 	// "ExactRepository" means that the identity in the signature must be in the same repository as a specific identity specified by "dockerRepository".

Reviewer: `dockerRepository` should refer to the `repository` field (in both places)

	IdentityMatchPolicyExactRepository IdentityMatchPolicy = "ExactRepository"
	// "remapIdentity" means that the signature must be in the same as the remapped image identity.
	IdentityMatchPolicyRemapIdentity IdentityMatchPolicy = "RemapIdentity"
)

// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ImagePolicyStatus struct {

	// policyJSON contains the whole policy applied to the namespace
	// which got written to disk. This includes cluster-wide policies
	// from the `openshift-config` namespace as well.
	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

	// conditions provide details on the status of the gatherer job.
	// +patchMergeKey=type
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"type"`
}
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Update container runtime config controller to watch ImagePolicy

MCO container runtime config controller ImagePolicy syncHandler updates the signature verification configurations:
- retrieves all the ImagePolicy instances on the cluster.

> - validates conflicting data from ImagePolicy instances. Rejects to roll out the CRs and reports the error to the machine config controller logs if the sigstore policy for the same image scope has been configured under global(openshift-config) namespace and non global namespace CRs. 

Reviewer: The “merge rules” section says that the global settings are used and the non-global ones are ignored (with the conflict logged in `Status`).

The two texts should probably be consistent. (I prefer the variant of ignoring the non-global ones, that way a namespace admin can’t sabotage the global config.)

Author: fixed as the merge rules, ignore the non-global ones.

    append the policy to existing policy; the policy will be written to `\<NAMESPACE\>.json`
    - the above cases do not apply:
    the policy will be written to `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`
  - coordinate the policies will be written to `/etc/containers/policy.json` with Image CR; inherit the `default` policy from Image CR; failed the rollout if the signature policy scope is also configured `insecureAcceptAnything` or `reject` by Image CR, report the error to machine config logs.
  - the `/etc/containers/policy.json` holds the cluster wide policy. `\<NAMESPACE\>.json` holds the merged cluster override policy and namespaced policy. Update the merged policy to `status` of each ImagePolicy CR as a json string.

Once an ImagePolicy object gets created/updated, container runtime config controller will call the syncHandler.
Once an ImagePolicy object gets deleted, container runtime config controller will delete the machine config and run the syncHandler

#### Notes

ImagePolicy is defined as namespaced CRD. `namespace: openshift-config` is used for cluster policy.

### Risks and Mitigations

Risk: The cluster scoped and namespace policies overwrite

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances. unprivileged namespace first creates a policy, and afterwards a cluster admin adds a cluster-wide policy that conflicts

Reviewer: (this paragraph ends with a partial sentence; maybe it can just be removed.)

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

### Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

MCO container runtime config controller can add unit tests and e2e tests.
- unit test: verify the policies from ImagePolicy instances merged correctly and the controller writes correct format policy.json
- e2e test: 
  - verify the MCO writes configuration to the correct location. 

>   - test demonstrating that an unsigned image in violation of the policy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - test demonstrating that an unsigned image in violation of the policy is rejected
```

  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@JoelSpeed"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2023-05-17
last-updated: 2023-06-22
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-1628
---

# Add CRD ImagePolicy to config.openshift.io/v1alpha1

## Summary

This enhancement propose an ImagePolicy CRD to provide a way to set sigstore image signature verification configuration on Openshift.

## Motivation

### User Stories

As an OpenShift user, I want to verify the container images signed using sigstore
tools, so that I can utilize the increased security of my software supply chain.

### Goals

- The user can create an ImagePolicy instance specifying the images/repositories to be verified and their policy. The MCO will write the configuration for signature verification. Once this is done, CRI-O can verify the images/repositories.

> - MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different kubernetes namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

Author: the policy scoped to the namespace. https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-688e8f3b56284c3f0e907836b95cbcb60bcd0676c4819a2e4b1524529bf8d5c5R43 mentioned the CRIO will choose the specific <namespace>.json using the namespace from the sandbox config.

could you specify what kind of conflict? The [Merge rules](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-688e8f3b56284c3f0e907836b95cbcb60bcd0676c4819a2e4b1524529bf8d5c5R264) has explained the policies on same namespaces.

> - MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different kubernetes namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

Reviewer 6: What would happen if I put two different policies for the same image scope for example? This is defining how the images should be signed in a particular repository right? But, what happens if i have two different configs for how an image should be signed? In that case, which one would it chose to apply?

> - MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different kubernetes namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

Author: That's documented at [policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md#policy-requirements)

If an image has two different policies configured at the following level respectively:
- (image level, repo level) : If multiple policy requirements match a given image, only the requirements from the most specific match apply, the more general policy requirements definitions are ignored.

- (image level, image level), (repo level, repo level): If multiple policy requirements match a given image, only the requirements from the most specific match apply, the more general policy requirements definitions are ignored.

> - MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different kubernetes namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

Reviewer: That actually seems to highlight a possible gap:

Currently, the merge rules from this PR mean that if the global `openshift-config` and an unprivileged per-namespace CR specify policy for _exactly the same scope_, that conflict is resolved by ignoring the unprivileged per-namespace policy, and using the global `openshift-config` policy; with the intent (IIRC) to let a cluster admin define mandatory policies.

But with the `policy.json` semantics, unprivileged namespaces could avoid those mandatory policies by using more narrow scopes (e.g. a scope for every image in a repo, instead of a scope for the whole repo).

My first instinct is to say this should be prohibited, i.e. unprivileged per-namespace scopes nested _inside_ global `openshift-config` defined scopes should be ignored/rejected, the same way the exactly-equal scopes are ignored/rejected.

Admittedly, I’m not as confident about the rejection of nested scopes as I’m about the rejection of exactly-equal scopes: with a very broad cluster-wide scope (e.g. for all of `company-registry.example.com`) defined on the cluster level, there might(?) be legitimate use cases for letting unprivileged users define other policies for individual repos, or at least for letting unprivileged users impose extra restrictions on top of the cluster-wide policy.

On balance, I think it would be better to reject per-namespace scopes nested inside mandatory cluster-wide scopes, in the first version. I don’t think it’s _too likely_ that users will run into this situation, and if they do, we can think about relaxing this (adding a field to cluster-wide scopes, to let them opt in into being overridden by per-namespace scopes?) in the future.

> - MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different kubernetes namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

Reviewer 6: It strikes me that there are a lot of decisions and scenarios that need to be played through about the permissions and potential ways a namespace scope could override the global scope. Is it documented somewhere all of the overlap, including these latest comments?

Perhaps some examples would help or a table that explains the behaviour?

- CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy by using the namespace from the sandbox config on the `PullImage` RPC.

### Non-Goals

- Allow configure policy for OCP product repo
- Providing a tool to mirror the signatures is out of the scope of this enhancement. In order to verify the signature, the disconnected users need to mirror signatures together with the application images. 
- Grant the application administrator the ability to weaken cluster-scoped policies, to avoid expanding the set of administrators capable of increasing cluster exposure to vulnerable images.
- Grant the application administrator the ability to tighten cluster-scoped policies. This could be useful in the future, but we are deferring it to limit the amount of work needed for an initial implementation.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for adding signature verification configurations in
cluster scope.

> 1. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file with `namespace: openshift-config`.

Author: the `openshift-config` namespace can be used as the cluster-scoped default of the imagepolicy CR.

4. The application administrator can delete the signature verification configuration by deleting its ImagePolicy instances.
5. The application administrator cannot override cluster scoped policies because they will treated with a higher priority.

### API Extensions

#### Type definitions

```go
// +genclient
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object

// ImagePolicy holds namespace-wide configuration configuration for image signature verification
//
// Compatibility level 4: No compatibility is provided, the API can change at any point for any reason. These capabilities should not be used by applications needing long term support.
// +openshift:compatibility-gen:level=4
// +openshift:enable:FeatureSets=TechPreviewNoUpgrade
type ImagePolicy struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	// metadata is the standard object's metadata.
	// More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#metadata
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	// spec holds user settable values for configuration
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required

> 	// +required

Reviewer 6: This isn't a valid tag, you only need `+kubebuilder:validation:Required`

	Spec ImagePolicySpec `json:"spec"`
	// status contains the observed state of the resource.
	// +optional
	Status ImagePolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// ImagePolicySpec is the specification of the ImagePolicy CRD.
type ImagePolicySpec struct {
	// scopes defines the list of image identities assigned to a policy. Each item refers to a scope in a registry implementing the "Docker Registry HTTP API V2".
	// scopes matching individual images are named Docker references in the fully expanded form, either using a tag or digest. For example, docker.io/library/busybox:latest (not busybox:latest).
	// More general scopes are prefixes of individual-image scopes, and specify a repository (by omitting the tag or digest), a repository

> 	// namespace, or a registry host (by only specifying the host name and possibly a port number) or a wildcarded expression starting with *., for matching all subdomains (not including a port number).

Reviewer 6: Nit
```suggestion
	// namespace, or a registry host (by only specifying the host name and possibly a port number) or a wildcard expression starting with *., for matching all subdomains (not including a port number).
```

	// For wildcarded subdomain matching, *.example.com is a valid case, but example*.*.com is not.
	// For more information about the format, see the document
	// about the docker transport field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md#docker
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +required
	// +listType=set
	Scopes []ImageScope `json:"scopes"`
	// policy defines the verification policy for the items in the scopes list
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +required
	Policy Policy `json:"policy"`
}

// ImageScope is the item of the scopes list.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^\*(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+$|^((((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+(?::[0-9]+)?)|(localhost(?::[0-9]+)?))(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?)(?::([\w][\w.-]{0,127}))?(?:@([A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*(?:[-_+.][A-Za-z][A-Za-z0-9]*)*[:][[:xdigit:]]{32,}))?$`

> type ImageScope string

Reviewer 6: I would be interested to see if we can limit this with a CEL validation rather than regex like this, I'm not sure if @ingvagabund discussed this with you. Regexes when failed get printed out, CEL can have a custom message which can help the user to understand why they failed the validation.

Has this been discussed yet?

Author: CEL validation was not suggested here. Will take a look.

Reviewer: (Historically _quite a few_ hand-crafted parsers of image names have tended to be inaccurate. So I’m a bit worried that moving from a declarative syntax to an imperative validation is going to introduce bugs.

OTOH a regex is also not what we actually want in the ideal case (a grammar processed by a parser generator which can guarantee there are no ambiguities), and there is certainly no point in showing this generated regexp in an UI.)

Author: eliminated the regex validation from kubebuilder and postpone this task to the code.

Reviewer 6: Is there at least some validation we can add for early feedback, eg, a correct set of allowed characters, min/max lengths. Happy to have the full regex in the code but having some early smoke tests would be useful for end user feedback.

When we say code, we mean a validating webhook right?

// Policy defines the verification policy for the items in the scopes list.
type Policy struct {

> 	// rootOfTrust specifies the public key, the Fulcio certificate and the Rekor public key.

Reviewer 6: If I'm an end user, who wants to create a policy, is it expected that I know what Fulcio and Rekor are?

As an EP reviewer, these haven't been mentioned up to this point, what are they, can I learn more about them somewhere?

Author: I assume the user already knows the kind of certificates that are used to sign the image when they verify the signature. 

Fulcio and Rekor are under the sigstore project. https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio, https://github.com/sigstore/rekor

Reviewer 6: I would probably not assume that, looking at the two links, they appear to basically be a key generator and a CA? It sounds like it's possible that you don't actually need to use Fulcio and Rekor to configure this feature? Is that right?

If those projects are not mandatory, it would probably be better to use more generic and well known terms than referring directly to the specific projects

Reviewer 6: Ok, I think that makes sense as an argument for keeping these named then. I think there's a level of context we _should_ add to the godoc, but you're right, not a complete tutorial. We can link out to docs for Rekor and Fulcio though to provide an end user somewhere to learn more

A good explanation in this enhancement on how it works would certainly help the technical writer transforming this into product docs down the line

	// Requires only one of keyData or fulcioCAData must be set.

> 	// +required

Reviewer 6: Should be the kubebuilder version
```suggestion
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
```

	RootOfTrust PolicyRootOfTrust `json:"rootOfTrust"`

	// fulcioSubject specifies OIDC issuer and the email of the fulcio authentication configuration.

> 	// Required if rootOfTrust.fulcioCAData is set.

Reviewer 6: Having dependencies across structs is confusing for users typically, I think we might want to restructure this to simplify the relationships

	// +optional
	FulcioSubject PolicyFulcioSubject `json:"fulcioSubject,omitempty"`

	// signedIdentity specifies what image identity the signature claims about the image.
	// +optional
	SignedIdentity PolicyIdentity `json:"signedIdentity,omitempty"`
}

// PolicyRootOfTrust defines the public key, the Fulcio certificate and the Rekor public key.
type PolicyRootOfTrust struct {

> 	// keyData contains inline base64 data of the public key.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
	// keyData contains inline base64 encoded data of the public key.
```

> 	// keyData can be empty if the image got signed keyless.

Reviewer 6: What is a keyless signature? I think this could be reworded to be a little clearer
```suggestion
	// May be omitted when the image was signed with a keyless signature.
```

Author: > What is a keyless signature?

@saschagrunert could you take a look?

Reviewer 6: So it seems that this keyless is a nickname for using a short lived, identity based token based on OIDC? I think it would be helpful to expand the comments to explain what this actually means

Reviewer: To be pedantic about this, there is no such thing as a “keyless signature” — every signature must be with some private key.

At best, it’s “keyless signing”, as in “the user does not _hold/maintain/protect_ a key” (but there is a key with a Fulcio-generated certificate somewhere in there).

---

Maybe we could just delete this sentence instead of dealing with these details? The field documentation already says that `KeyData` and `FulcioCAData` are exclusive alternatives.

	// +unionDiscriminator
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=MatchRepoDigestOrExact;MatchRepository;ExactRepository;RemapIdentity
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	MatchPolicy IdentityMatchPolicy `json:"matchPolicy,omitempty"`
	// exactRepository is required if matchPolicy is set to "ExactRepository".
	// +optional
	PolicyMatchExactRepository *ExactRepository `json:"exactRepository,omitempty"`
	// remapIdentity is required if matchPolicy is set to "RemapIdentity".
	// +optional
	PolicyMatchRemapIdentity *RemapIdentity `json:"remapIdentity,omitempty"`
}

// IdentityMatchPolicy defines the type of matching for setting "matchPolicy".
// Valid values are "MatchRepoDigestOrExact", "MatchRepository", "ExactRepository", "RemapIdentity". When omitted, the default value is "MatchRepoDigestOrExact".
type IdentityMatchPolicy string

type PolicyMatchExactRepository struct {
	// repository is the reference of the image identity to be matched.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required

> 	Repository string `json:"repository,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: What is the format of this? Any validation we can apply?

Author: I suggested we review the details about validation format and comment when we start working on openshfit/api after this enhancement is merged.

Reviewer 6: Can you open the API PR in parallel then? IMO understanding the semantics and UX of the API is important and relates very directly to the enhancement process which is used to design our new interfaces and how users will interact with the feature

Author: @JoelSpeed The API PR is https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1457

}

type PolicyMatchRemapIdentity struct {
	// prefix is the prefix of the image identity to be matched.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	Prefix string `json:"prefix,omitempty"`
	// signedPrefix is the prefix of the image identity to be matched in the signature.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	SignedPrefix string `json:"signedPrefix,omitempty"`

> }

Reviewer 6: This needs to be expanded with more context, examples of valid values and validation of the format.

Also, these fields are required so `omitempty` needs to be dropped

const (
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepoDigestOrExact IdentityMatchPolicy = "MatchRepoDigestOrExact"
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepository        IdentityMatchPolicy = "MatchRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyExactRepository        IdentityMatchPolicy = "ExactRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyRemapIdentity          IdentityMatchPolicy = "RemapIdentity"
)

// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ImagePolicyStatus struct {

	// policyJSON contains the whole policy applied to the kubernetes namespace
	// which got written to disk. This includes cluster-wide policies
	// from the `openshift-config` namespace as well.
	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

> 	// conditions provide details on the status of the gatherer job.

Reviewer 6: Is this comment correct?

There are a number of validation tags that normally accompany a conditions list, please make sure these are added (you'll see them on other conditions lists)

	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"type"`
}
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Update container runtime config controller to watch ImagePolicy

MCO container runtime config controller ImagePolicy syncHandler updates the signature verification configurations:
- Retrieves all the ImagePolicy instances on the cluster.
- Rre-validation: parse the images to validate the policy is not for scopes under OCP product repo. Report the error to machine config logs and the `status` field of that ImagePolicy CR.

> - Validates conflicting data from ImagePolicy instances. Ignore the policies from non global namespace CRs if the sigstore policy for the same image scope has been configured under global(openshift-config) namespace. Log this to the `status` field of both global and non global CRs.

Reviewer 6: Why have a special namespace? How would I apply policy to the openshift-config namespace? 

Have you considered a Cluster scoped version of the resource to apply policy to the cluster? A ClusterImagePolicy?

Author: It was discussed here: https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CK1AE4ZCK/p1683266421651699 and we want to support the namespace scoped CRD.
cluster admins declare a cluster-scoped default by using 'openshfit-config'.

Reviewer 6: It seems there's motivation to have some support for namespaced, but that conversation also talks about how it's only likely that users are overriding the cluster policy for tests? The conversation reads to me like the cluster scoped policy is much more important.

The precedent for this, in other APIs would be to have a Cluster scoped version of it, then a namespace scoped version of it that handles namespace specifics. I think that would be a good pattern here too.

The cluster admin can handle the cluster scoped version, like they do for ClusterRoles for example, then the namespace admin can handle the namespaced version.

Having a "admin namespace" is complex and non-intuitive. It also opens up a bunch of questions about what happens for pods and other policies in that particular namespace, which could be avoided if we just go with a Cluster scoped CRD for the cluster scoped policy

  - when the syncHandler processing an image scope of a non-global namespaced CR
    - the scope exists in an existing `openshift-config` namespace CR: do not roll out the non-global policy in `\<NAMESPACE\>.json`. the policy for `openshift-config` will be written to `/etc/containers/policy.json` and `\<NAMESPACE\>.json`; update the `status` of both CRs and  machine config controller logs that the policy for `openshift-config` is applied, the non-global namespace policy is ignored.
    - the scope exists in another non-global namespace CR:
    append the policy to existing policy; the policy will be written to `\<NAMESPACE\>.json`
    - the above cases do not apply:
    the policy will be written to `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`
  - coordinate the policies will be written to `/etc/containers/policy.json` with the base [/etc/containers/policy.json](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/templates/master/01-master-container-runtime/_base/files/policy.yaml) file or the Image CR; inherit the `default` policy from them;

>   failed the rollout if the signature policy scope is also configured `insecureAcceptAnything` or `reject` by Image CR, report the error to machine config logs.

Author: I made tense mistakes. Updated with the corrected version.

>   failed the rollout if the signature policy scope is also configured `insecureAcceptAnything` or `reject` by Image CR, report the error to machine config logs.

Reviewer: Thanks, that’s much better now.

  - the `/etc/containers/policy.json` holds the cluster wide policy. `\<NAMESPACE\>.json` holds the merged cluster override policy and namespaced policy.
- For namespaced ImagePolicy CRs, updates the merged cluster override policy and namespaced policy existed in `\<NAMESPACE\>.json` to `status` of each ImagePolicy CR as a json string. For openshift-config namespace ImagePolicy CRs, updates the merged cluster override policy existed in `/etc/containers/policy.json` to `status` of each ImagePolicy CR as a json string.
- Image policies that are written to `/etc/containers/policy.json` will be rolled out by machine config `99-[pool]-generated-registries`. Merged policies that are written to `\<NAMESPACE\>.json` will be rolled out by machine config `99-[pool]-generated-imagepolicies`.
- Once an ImagePolicy object gets created/updated, container runtime config controller will call the syncHandler, create machine config `99-[pool]-generated-imagepolicies` if the namespaced CR can successfully rollout.

> Once an ImagePolicy object gets deleted, container runtime config controller will delete the machine config `99-[pool]-generated-imagepolicies` and run the syncHandler.

Author: Clarified that the deletion of the machine config is needed when the last ImagePolicy object is deleted.  The syncHandler will coordinate the Image CR managed by 99-pool-generated-registries.

            "signedPrefix": "test-remap-signed-prefix"
          }
        },
        {
          "type": "sigstoreSigned",
          "keyData": "dGVzdC1rZXktZGF0YQ==",
          "rekorPublicKeyData": "dGVzdC1yZWtvci1rZXktZGF0YQ==",
          "signedIdentity": {
            "type": "remapIdentity",
            "prefix": "test-remap-prefix",
            "signedPrefix": "test-remap-signed-prefix"
          }
        }
      ],
      "test1.com": [
        {
          "type": "sigstoreSigned",
          "keyData": "dGVzdC1rZXktZGF0YQ==",
          "rekorPublicKeyData": "dGVzdC1yZWtvci1rZXktZGF0YQ==",
          "signedIdentity": {
            "type": "remapIdentity",
            "prefix": "test-remap-prefix",
            "signedPrefix": "test-remap-signed-prefix"
          }
        }
      ],
      "test2.com": [
        {
          "type": "sigstoreSigned",
          "keyData": "dGVzdC1rZXktZGF0YQ==",
          "signedIdentity": {
            "type": "matchRepoDigestOrExact"
          }
        }
      ]
    },
    "docker-daemon": {
      "": [
        {
          "type": "insecureAcceptAnything"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

#### Notes

> ImagePolicy is defined as namespaced CRD. `namespace: openshift-config` is used for cluster policy.

Reviewer 6: Why is this better than having a cluster scoped policy? How do i apply policy to the `openshift-config` namespace?

Is there an argument for the policy to only be applied only by an administrator? And therefore would be better as a cluster scoped resource with a namespace selector to allow it to apply to all or multiple namespaces?

Is there a use case where the cluster administrator may want to apply the policy to a subset of namespaces? Is that possible with the current design?

Author: We want to support the project/namespaces level policies. We already have some requests for namespaces/project level credential management that we haven't addressed yet.

The current design does not support an imagepolicy for a subset of namespaces. With the CRD coming out as a namespace scoped, the administrator can develop their own tools to create objects for multiple namespaces. Or in the future, we can extend the schema with something like a namespace selector if requested.

Author: > Is there an argument for the policy to only be applied only by an administrator? And therefore would be better as a cluster scoped resource with a namespace selector to allow it to apply to all or multiple namespaces?

@mtrmac @saschagrunert What do you think about this?

Reviewer 2: Having it namespaced is a requirement from product management. 

> Is there an argument for the policy to only be applied only by an administrator? And therefore would be better as a cluster scoped resource with a namespace selector to allow it to apply to all or multiple namespaces?

Yes, we evaluated that in the past and came to the conclusion that it would simplify things if it's only cluster scoped. Still, the end user flexibility is prioritized over implementation complexity by our product management.

Reviewer 6: > Having it namespaced is a requirement from product management.

I don't think that's necessarily true. It seems from the context I have that there's a desire to allow namespace level overrides to the global policy, right? The desire from PM isn't that the resource is namespaced, I think that's an implementation detail

So with that, I would expect the cluster wide policy to be a Cluster scoped object, and the namespace policy to be a namespaced object. There is precedent for this, look at RBAC for example with ClusterRoles and Roles. I think that will be a simpler and more intuitive pattern for end users than having to know that a magic namespace configures the entire cluster, where other namespaces just configure for themselves.

This magic namespace concept is adding complexity, which as far as I can tell, has not been solved yet. There's no mention in this document about how I would apply policy to the `openshift-config` namespace only, nor any restrictions on that namespace currently documented. 

Either the `openshift-config` questions need to be answered, or the CRD should become 2 CRDs, a Cluster scoped and a Namespace scoped CRD.

My vote, from a UX perspective, would be 2 CRDs

Reviewer: > Is there an argument for the policy to only be applied only by an administrator? And therefore would be better as a cluster scoped resource with a namespace selector to allow it to apply to all or multiple namespaces?

Consider multi-tenant clusters. In that case the tenants might well want to impose specific signature policies for their private namespaces, without the cluster admin caring to impose those policies for everyone.

---

> Is there a use case where the cluster administrator may want to apply the policy to a subset of namespaces? Is that possible with the current design?

I don’t think partially applying a policy _by a single decision-maker_ makes much sense. Unless the cluster is under attack, images in a single on-registry repo (`vendor-registry.example.com/product/server`) are going to come from a single vendor, signed using one policy and process. So, there is, from a global ideal point of view, _one right way_ to verify signatures for images on that on-registry repo (modulo some small security trade-offs, like “do we care about Rekor”).

I can’t see any reason why a cluster admin would say “I know images in `example.com/vendor/product` are signed by $key, and namespaces A,B,C should enforce that, but namespaces D,E,F should not care, and namespaces G,H should require some other key”.

(Contrast that with the multi-tenant case, where there is _still_ conceptually one “right” policy to apply[1], but the tenant’s admin and the clusters’ admin just don’t _care_ the same amount about the policy, so the tenant can configure a per-namespace policy without having to obtain agreement from the cluster admin.)

[1] (This is true as long as we don’t have per-tenant mirrors, allowing every tenant to redirect “the same scope” to a different data source; we don’t have that and I don’t think we should ever have that. Signatures are useful to the extent image names “mean something”, and are not just nicknames that are habitually redirected to completely different destinations.)

Author: update the enhancement to include independent ClusterImagePolicy and ImagePolicy CRDs

Author: @JoelSpeed PTAL

### Risks and Mitigations

Risk: The cluster scoped and namespace policies overwrite

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.

Author: For the same scop, the local application administrator can not make the policy stricter or more relaxed.
The local image policies can configure the policies for certain applications that may have unique dependencies that don't align with cluster-wide policies.

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.

Reviewer 6: Is there validation that prevents a local policy being created that would overlap with the cluster wide policy? There should be, else a user may create a local policy and not realise that the changes they are making have no effect to the cluster

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.

Author: The local policy will not have an effect; Users will be notified through the `status` message of the CR. https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-688e8f3b56284c3f0e907836b95cbcb60bcd0676c4819a2e4b1524529bf8d5c5R276

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.

Reviewer 6: That link isn't working for me, can you try again or point me to where you've covered this in a different way?

> Mitigation: MCO container runtime config controller makes sure namespaced policies for an image cannot override global definitions when merging cluster openshift-config policies and namespaced policies into status field of ImagePolicy instances.

Author: > That link isn't working for me, can you try again or point me to where you've covered this in a different way?

https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-fb631ca70e56b7e72dcd1e5e0880976a7a916abf88d8c3c220b7fc2599415f57R289

- Available by default
- Backhaul SLI telemetry
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

#### Removing a deprecated feature

Not applicable.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Upgrade expectations:
- In order to use ImagePolicy, an existing cluster will have to make an upgrade to the version that the `ImagePolicy` CRD is available.
- If the existing cluster manages `/etc/containers/policy.json` via the MachineConfig, the configuration will continue to work if no new `ImagePolicy` resources created during the upgrade. If `ImagePolicy` resources created and resulting `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json` exists, CRI-O will use the config from `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

Downgrade expectations: 
- Not applicable. 
  If `N` does not support ImagePolicy CRD, `N+1`supports IamgePolicy. It is not expected that the ImagePolicy related to the failure `N->N+1`. New resources should not be created during `N->N+1`.

### Version Skew Strategy

> The MCO does not require skew check.

Author: Deleted this line.

> The `ImagePolicy` involve coordinating behavior in the CRI-O v1.28. The node team will not expose the `ImagePolicy` CRD if the CRI-O/MCO does not support the namespaced signature to avoid the version skew with CRI-O.

Reviewer 6: What does this sentence really mean, what does the feature not being exposed mean?

Author: The manifest for this CRD will be removed from openshfit/api if CRI-O/MCO can not support the feature within the target release.

Reviewer 6: Right, I think this could be reworded then. I don't think this is necessarily the purpose of the version skew heading. I think what we are looking for here is context on, what happens during an upgrade, when the CRD is installed and then the CRIO is updated later

Does the policy only take effect when the upgrade is complete?

Author: I addressed that the policy will be in effect when both upgrades are completed. In the upgrade process, the initial step reboots the system using a new base image that has an updated CRI-O binary.
 https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-fb631ca70e56b7e72dcd1e5e0880976a7a916abf88d8c3c220b7fc2599415f57R558

- MCO rolling out configuration file failure reported by MCO
- If the signature validation fails, then CRI-O will report that in the same way as for any other pull failure. Further enhancements to the kubelet, CRI and CRI-O error handling can be achieved in future Kubernetes releases.

The above errors should not impact the overall cluster health
OCP Node team is likely to be called upon in case of escalation with one of the failure modes.

#### Support Procedures

- detect the failure modes in a support situation, describe possible symptoms (events, metrics,
  alerts, which log output in which component)
  - If the ImagePolicy CR does not follow the syntax requirements, api-server will fail when creating the objects.
  - If the ImagePolicy CR is not rolled out by MCO, machine-config-controller logs will shows error with the reason.

- disable the API extension (e.g. remove MutatingWebhookConfiguration `xyz`, remove APIService `foo`)
  - Disabling/removing the CRD is not possible without removing the CR instances. Customer will lose data.

- What consequences does it have on existing, running workloads?

>   - No impact. CRI-O does not verify signature verification for running containers.

Reviewer 6: To roll this out, will MCO reboot the hosts? If so, there's an impact since the containers will all be restarted

Author: It does not need the reboot, we don't want to ask for the reboot every time a namespace admin makes the change.  follows the current [Reload Crio](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/ff7ef2ec8ddbdf4f5758ee8f3ba3fea2d364e581/docs/MachineConfigDaemon.md?plain=1#L165) action.

Reviewer 6: Might be worth clarifying that within the doc here

  - "@saschagrunert, for API design, implementation details and graduation criteria"
  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@yuqi-zhang"
  - "@mtrmac"
  - "@wking"
  - "@ingvagabund"
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@JoelSpeed"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2023-05-17
last-updated: 2023-06-22
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-1628
---

# Add CRD ImagePolicy to config.openshift.io/v1alpha1

## Summary

> This enhancement propose an ImagePolicy CRD to provide a way to set sigstore image signature verification configuration on Openshift.

Reviewer 7: nit: proposes

## Motivation

### User Stories

As an OpenShift user, I want to verify the container images signed using [sigstore](https://docs.sigstore.dev/about/overview/)
tools, so that I can utilize the increased security of my software supply chain.

### Goals

- The user can create an ImagePolicy instance specifying the images/repositories to be verified and their policy. The MCO will write the configuration for signature verification. Once this is done, CRI-O can verify the images/repositories.

- MCO container runtime config controller watches ImagePolicy instance in different kubernetes namespaces and merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.

> - CRI-O can verify Cosign signature signed images using configuration from ImagePolicy by using the namespace from the sandbox config on the `PullImage` RPC.

Reviewer 7: by matching the kubernetes namespace

### Non-Goals

> - Allow configure policy for OCP product repo

Reviewer 7: Provide policy for images in the payload.

- Grant the application administrator the ability to weaken cluster-scoped policies, to avoid expanding the set of administrators capable of increasing cluster exposure to vulnerable images.
- Grant the application administrator the ability to tighten cluster-scoped policies. This could be useful in the future, but we are deferring it to limit the amount of work needed for an initial implementation.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for adding signature verification configurations in
cluster scope.
1. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file with `namespace: openshift-config`.
2. The cluster administrator creates ImagePolicy instance using `oc create -f imagepolicy.yaml`.
3. The cluster administrator can get the merged cluster scope policies from `status` of ImagePolicy instances. 
4. The cluster administrator can delete the signature verification configuration by deleting its ImagePolicy instances. 

**application administrator** is a human user responsible for
adding signature verification configurations for specific namespace.

> 1. The application administrator creates ImagePolicy yaml file for namespace that is not `namespace: openshift-config`

Reviewer 7: Why only openshift-config? We want to exclude all default openshift namespaces, right?

Reviewer 7: nvm, I see why.

	SignedPrefix string `json:"signedPrefix"`
}

const (
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepoDigestOrExact IdentityMatchPolicy = "MatchRepoDigestOrExact"
	IdentityMatchPolicyMatchRepository        IdentityMatchPolicy = "MatchRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyExactRepository        IdentityMatchPolicy = "ExactRepository"
	IdentityMatchPolicyRemapIdentity          IdentityMatchPolicy = "RemapIdentity"
)

// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ImagePolicyStatus struct {

	// policyJSON contains the whole policy applied to the kubernetes namespace
	// which got written to disk. This includes cluster-wide policies
	// from the `openshift-config` namespace as well.
	PolicyJSON string `json:"policyJSON,omitempty"`

	// conditions provide details on the status of this API Resource.
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=type
	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Update container runtime config controller to watch ImagePolicy

MCO container runtime config controller ImagePolicy syncHandler updates the signature verification configurations:
- Retrieves all the ImagePolicy instances on the cluster.

> - Rre-validation: parse the images to validate the policy is not for scopes under OCP product repo. Report the error to machine config logs and the `status` field of that ImagePolicy CR.

Reviewer 3: Minor point, should we degrade the MCO here? Just an error log in the MCO (MCC in this case) probably won't be very visible

Author: I made a mistake; it's actually an info-level log message about an error encountered while adding an OCP product repo image. The CRCC will ignore this error and proceed with the rollout, similar to how it ignores errors when adding an OCP repo to the block list.
I will update and make it clear.

- Validates conflicting data from ImagePolicy instances. Ignore the policies from non global namespace CRs if the sigstore policy for the same image scope has been configured under global(openshift-config) namespace. Log this to the `status` field of both global and non global CRs.
- Adds following configurations to a single machine config
  - merges the instances for each namespace into a single [containers-policy.json](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-policy.json.5.md) in a predefined `/path/to/policies/\<NAMESPACE\>.json`.
  ImagePolicy CR should not change the `default` field of the cluster-wide policy.json. And the `default` of each  \<NAMESPACE\>.json will be the same as the cluster-wide `default` in /etc/containers/policy.json. The `default` might be `insecureAcceptAnything` or `reject`, the ImagePolicy handler needs to inherits the `default` value from Image CR handler.

>   - adds [/etc/containers/registries.d/*.yaml](https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.d.5.md) to allow matching sigstore signatures, for example:

Reviewer 3: Question: is this also being written by the MCO? via that same machineconfig?

Author: yes

    ```yaml
    docker:
      my-registry/image:
        use-sigstore-attachments: true
    ```

    Alternatively, we can enable it node wide:

    ```yaml
    default-docker:
      use-sigstore-attachments: true
    ```
- The functions ImagePolicy syncHandler will be insert to current syncImageConfig() to coordinate with Image CR on editing `/etc/containers/policy.json`.

> - Merge rules for CRs and json string global policy: 

Reviewer: Highlighting a comment from a “resolved” thread (which I can’t reopen):

The merge rules need to account for scopes nested inside cluster-admin-defined scopes: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402#discussion_r1343009236

Author: addressed https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1402/files#diff-ba23e083fdb5edb0f67de2d1b1053a4e6df0062dda73a1e255bbaf1f6337d5aaR278
